
--- PAGE 1 ---
•J
COUNSELLING
AND
guidance
Second Edition
-5r: .
S Narayana Rao
Formerly '
Professor and Chairman
Depariment of Psychology
Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupad
'  1. .•('
I I
C
JDBI
5096
I58.3IV\0
• • • • ' ,w>f' •,th/
Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company LimitedNEW DELln
McGraw-Hill Offices
Oelbl New York StLx)uis San Francisco Auckland Bogotfi Guatemda^^^amburg Lisbon London Madrid Mexico Milan Montreal Panama ■Paris San Juan Sao Paulo Singapore Sydney Tokyo Toronto


--- PAGE 2 ---
Tata McGraw-Hill _
" a™ ofTke McOrawWU Compa,„es
X: , •158.3^. """t
'(Wm-
tin/ID Ic
n . >
-p.i^ /
1
© IWl, Tata McSraw-HIII Publtehing Company Limited
Twelfth reprint 2002
RLDQRRZARXCBA
ony meor
Tata McSraw°HIlfpuS?h^| Com^a'?^^ publishers,
ISBN 0-07-460474-0
Published by Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Limited,7. West Patel Nagar. New Delhl-no 008, and printed at
Rajkamol Electric Press, B-35/9 G T Karnal Road, Delhi no 033


--- PAGE 3 ---
Offered
at the Lotus Feet of
Bhagavan Sri Satya SaiBaba
fl".";?- '• "J » nnt* r-
i^^EifinnA
Li


--- PAGE 4 ---
~\-r
'  <
r  j
Ik. -  in '■


--- PAGE 5 ---
First Edlltl©ini
Counselling is an act of assistance. When a person is in difficulty and seeks out
someone in whom he has confidence for advice and guidance, a situation exists
for counselling. It is very common situation in everyday life. Younger persons
seek the advice of older persons; less successful persons seek the advice of more
successful persons. In a situation like this, where one seeks the guidance of
another in sorting out one's problems, there is usually an assumption, which is not
always correct, that the guide who gives advice understands the problem of the
person who seeks advice, and that the solution given as a piece of advice is the
best possible solution. In other words, although the situation for counselling,
where one person seeks the advice of another person, is very common, the expertise
for giving appropriate advice is not common. It requires the special knowledge,
skill and competence of a counsellor in order to understand the problem of the
other person in the perspective of the other person and then to lead the person,
through a process of discovery to a solution or alternative solutions which are not
only feasible but also acceptable to the person. Htus, although persons have been
giving advice since time immemorial, counselling, as it has developed in scientific
psychology, has been of more recent development. Counselling is not just an act
of advising or guiding another person, a common function performed by parents,
teachers, doctors and others in our society. The art of counselling depends so
much on the specific knowledge, understanding, skill, attitudes and values of the
counsellor that it has become a specialised job for which one requires professional
training.
Towards the middle of the nineteenth century, when psychology staned emerging
as a science, one of its directions of growth was through rigorous experimentation
and research of a quantitative variety, giving rise to rapid developments in the
field of measurement of individual differences as well as of scientific phenomena
like perception, learning, intelligence tests, etc. This type of psychology came to
be known as experimental psychology, where laboratory techniques of observation
and measurement and the development of proper instrumentation became very
important. About the same time, however, developments were taking place in the
medical field and particularly in the treatment and care of mental patients. The
progress in this field was more in the matter of techniques to help the patient to
recover, which came to be identified as psychoanalysis and psychotherapy. These
two important directions of development, one emphasizing more the understanding
of the phenomenon under observation in the laboratory, and the other emphasizing


--- PAGE 6 ---
vUl Foreword to the First Edition
understanding of the person in controlled conditions, indicate the academic as
well as the practical aspects of psychology as a science. In trying to develop this
ait of healing the mentally sick person; there were developments in theories and
techniques which led to the development of a branch of psychology concerned
with personality. Later on, the two trends converged so that our understanding of
the dimensions and depth of the human personality increased considerably.
Historically speaking, counselling psychology is rooted in this praxis aspect of
modem psychology. The counsellor's ultimate concern is not with a theory or a
methodology, but with a person who has to be helped to solve his or her problems.
After the First World War, when child guidance clinics started working in the
USA, one of the challenges which a psychologist had to face was to devise tools
and techniques of understanding children. The tests which were available at that
time were concCTned only with intelligence. Later on, achievement tests came and
tests to measiue the progress of the child in development were also available. But
to understand a child as a person and particularly the child facing problems of
adjustment required something more than just tests. Techniques had to be developed
in order to help such children. Gradually, with increasing school enrolment,
adolescent boys and girls began to demand more attention from the psychologists.
The problems were not just educational.
Problems of adolescents, as in India, are more complex. They arise out of the
adolescent's total interaction with the environment, which has various aspects,
namely, educational, social, cultural, economic, religious and so on. To face these
practical problems of helping the youngsters, teachers in schools had to understand
the psychology of the child and the adolescent. Whereas in earlier times, the
teacher in India performed the role of a gimi, which included counselling, it is no
longer possible in the present times. Hence, there arose a need for establishing
trained counsellors for the schools, and counselling psychology is the scientific
basis of this particular kind of helping act.
In order to understand a person, it is necessary to have a good knowledge of
the psychology of the child, the adolescent and the adult It is necessary to understand
the nature of verbal communication, the communication that is usually observable
in any interactional process that takes place between the parents and the children,
the teachers and the students, the employer and the employees, and so on. Any
counselling situation is also a social situation because there are two persons
interacting in a counselling situation. For the counsellor, therefore, it is necessary
to have a'knowledge of social psychology and particularly of the processes of
interaction and the dynamics of a dyadic relationship. In order to help a person,
and particularly a person who has problems of adjustment and has, therefore,
come to seek guidance from an expert, it is necessary to understand the structure,
functions and the dynamics of personality. This is because more often than not
superficial problems are rooted in personality, and superficial solutions to deep-
rooted problems do more harm than good. The task of a specialist is really to
judge in a given case the severity of the problem and its roots.
In the teaching of young students and the teachers who want to be counsellors,
it is necessary to give a thorough understanding of the process of counselling,
apart from a knowledge of the techniques and methods of evaluation. There should


--- PAGE 7 ---
Foreword to the First Edition I*
be some practical experience available to the prospective counsellor becausecounselling psychology cannot be theoretical, although there is a theory whjcneeds to be mastered. One can only master it properly through actual work with a
variety of situations and clients of counselling.
There is a dearth of good books on counselling psychology in India. Here we
have an age-old tradition and culture of counselling as an acceptable m(^® °
human relationship, but we have yet to acquire the modem scientific tradition
professionally trained counsellors. It is, therefore, necessary for a book on counsellmS
psychology to present theories, methodologies, concepts, and such other matters
of counselling psychology in such a manner that this branch of knowledge an
practice can become assimilated into the newly emerging scientific and profession
culture. I am sure that a book like this one, which has been vkritten by Professor
Narayana Rao, whose competence in this field is of a very high order, should no
only help students of this branch of knowledge, but also others like teacher educators,
employers, managers, etc. because they also need to understand and master sotne
of the subjects tmd techniques of dealing with people, which have been dealt wi
here. I should think that this book is a useful addition to the earlier books on o
subject, and Indian students particularly will find it worthwhile.
S.K.Mttba
Director
National Council of EducationoiResearch and
New Delhi


--- PAGE 8 ---
■il


--- PAGE 9 ---
The fiist edition of this book which was published under the title Counselling
Psychology was written to meet the need for a quality Indian text fulfllling the
requirements of post-graduate students of psychology and education, and those
pursuing diploma courses in counselling and guidance. It was also designed to
serve as a reference book to counsellors, psychiatrists and other professional
workers. The furst edition was extensively used in most universities in India and
in some abroad. Several other non-teacMng institutions/agencies also used the
book. Suggestions from the users—students, teachers and practitioners—^were
received. This revised second edition. Counselling and Guidance incorporates most
of the suggestions received. Practically all universities in India onering coiu'se in
psychology and education offer counselling and guidance as an integrated course
with the exception of a couple of universities which offer a course in counselling
psychology. In order to meet the need for a comprehensive book in counselling
and guidance, modifications have been made, wherever necessary, in addition to
elaborating the section on 'Counselling and Related Fields'. New material concerning
'Educational Guidance' has also been added. Special areas in counselling are
discussed in greater detail adding new sub-sections such as 'Counselling of Weaker
Sections', 'Counselling Drug Addicts', etc.
The book in its present form is expected to adequately meet the basic objective
of providing a clear and concise account of the different aspects of counselling
and guidance.
Any one who has had the experience of writing a book knows the disappointment
of not being able to thank adequately the people who helped and contributed
significantly to complete the woric. I thank Dr Suijlta Sangamitra, Associate ProfesscH*
of Education and S.K.N. Rao for all their help.
S Narayana Rao


--- PAGE 10 ---
'4
-A
■ I ■
' 1


--- PAGE 11 ---
First Edition
This book has emerged from my experience as a teacher of counselling psychology
for over a decade, and the award of the University Grants Commission's Fellowship
to write it. Writing a textbook on Counselling Psychology is a formidable task. In
recent years there has been tremendous expansion of the scope of counselling and
of research dealing with different aspects of counselling. What prompted me in
this venture is the non-availabili^ of all the required information for students of
counselling in a single book. There are pioneering books, like Elahn and McLean's
Counselling Psychology, Pepinsky and Pepinsky's Counselling: Theory andPraciice,
and Bordin's Psychological Counselling, which follow different lines of approach.
A student is likely to be confused by these.
In 1964, Fr Fuster, SJ., and more recently, in 1976, Pasricha have published
Psychological Counselling in India, and Guidance and Counselling in Indian
Education, respectively. The two books have largely concentrated on guidance,
especially in the educational setting.
The basic objective of this book is to provide a clear but concise account of the
different aspects of counselling psychology. The term 'counselling' is variously
interpreted and understood.
An attempt is made here to set out counselling psychology as a distinct field of
specialization. For this purpose. Chapters 1 and 2 as well as Chapter 14 are
designed to present a succinct account qf the emergence and development of
counselling and its relation to other kihdred fields. The term counselling is confused
not only with guidance, but also with psychotherapy. Chapter 2 strives to define
the field of counselling as distinct from psychotherapy. Chapter 3 portrays the
developmental characteristics and the precipitating problems of youth in the
educational context in India, which need sympathetic understanding and assistance.
The underlying theme is that counselling is one of the helping professions, and in
this context, counseU'ees, parents, teachers, administrators and the public in general,
expect counselling to help them with their problems and difficulties. Their
expectations may often be contradictory to one another. It would therefore be
useful to state the goals of counselling at the outset such that there is no confusion
regarding the expectations. Chapter 4 sets out the counselling goals and discusses
them in the light of expectations of different individuals and agencies in relation
to the objectives or goals of counselling.
Counselling, as a helping profession, desires to bring about changes in knowledge,
attitudes •• and behaviour of individuals employing different approaches. These are


--- PAGE 12 ---
xlv Preface to tfie First Editfon
discussed in Chapter 5. No pretention is made to present the theories of counselling
in any great det^ or depth. Only representative theories are considered in their
essential outlines. Chapters 6 through 9 describe the counselling process at some
length. The use of psychological tests is discussed in passing, and not as a central
theme. More attention is paid to the counselling interview. Counselling, which
was understood essentially as a face-to-face and one-to-one interaction, had to be
extended to group situations to meet the exigencies of time. Group counselling is
outlined in Chapter 9. Chapter 10 specifically focusses on counselling in the
educational setting which includes both educational and vocational guidance.
A helping profession always has demands made on it for which it may not be
prepared at the outset. But a counsellor cannot ignore and be indifferent to the
need to assuage and alleviate human suffo'ing in different situations and under
different conditions. Chapter 11 discusses some of the special areas in which the
counsellor may be called upon the function. The special areas described are by no
means exhaustive; only a few are selected for presentation. In recent times,
counselling is becoming progressively specialized such that sub-specialities are
fast developing. This chapter deals with a few of them briefly.
In a praxeological science, there is a need for evaluation of outcomes. Counselling,
as a praxeological science, cannot ignore this vital aspect. A counsellee makes an
appointment with the counsellor and goes through the counselling process normally
until the relationship is terminated. Naturally, the question whether the counsellee
has benefitt^ or not from counselling is important. This calls for evaluation.
Evaluation is dependent on several criteria. Chapter 12 discusses briefly the problems
of evaluation and considers relevant critoia.
Chapter 13 has, for its theme, counsellor preparation, as counselling is fast
becoming a professional field of activity. A professional field must pay attention
to four requisites, viz., selection, training, certification and professional ethics or a
code of conduct of its members. This chapter briefly discusses the above issues.
The last but one chapter is devoted to the consideration of modem trends. It is
undoubtedly hazardous and foolhardy to predict the future especially when one
does not have all the necessary information to base one's predictions. The chapter
describes a model of counselling which could be of practical and heiuistic value.
The three-dimensional model discusses the target of intervention, the purpose of
intervention and the method or means of intervention in helping counsellees with
problems. This scheme hopes to provide the much needed theoretical model for
counselling. The last chapter gives a brief account of the status of counselling in
India. The appendix presents the ethical standards as set out by the National
Vocational and Educational Guidance Association.
It is thus seen that the attempt is to cover the field of counselling psychology
as broadly as possible, without entering into the polemics, and details could have
several lacunae.
The primary objective, however, has been to provide students of counselling
psychology with a simple and comprehensive book covering all the important
aspects of the field. The labour and the time ^nt in writing this book on counselling
psychology has been on the whole a rewarding experience.
Anyone who has written a book knows the disappointment of not being able to


--- PAGE 13 ---
Preface to the First Edition xv
lhank the large number of people who contributed in so many ways to the project.
It is impossible to thank adequately all those helped. Among those who deserve
special mention are; Dr (Mrs) G. Nalini Devi, Lecturer, Dept. of Psychology who
was associated from the early stages of this book writing project. Dr (Miss)
S. Ushasree, Mr K. Sivasankara Reddy, Mrs Ujjwala Rani, Lecturers' in the
Department of Psychology, Mr K. Srinivasa Rao, Research Assistant, Centre for
Studies in Human and Social Development and my daughter Miss Sujita Sangamitra,
M.Sc., Research Fellow, Dept. of Geography have spent many hours in reading
through the typescript, the proofs, and in preparing the index. Their assistance is
gratefully acknowledged. The constructive suggestions and kind indulgence of my
wife have contributed in no small a measure to improve the book qualitatively.
Mr M. Munikrishna Reddy and Mr R. Munikumar deserve rich compliments
for the able and painstaking typing of the manuscript through its various stages.
Notwithstanding the several demands on his lime by different agencies and
individuals apart from the onerous duties of administering such an apex organisation
as the National Council of Educational Research & Training (NCERT), Dr Shib
K. Mitra, Director, has found it possible to write the Foreword. I am deeply
beholden to him for his academic interest
S Narayana Rao


--- PAGE 14 ---
The author wishes to acknowledge the permission granted by the following
organizations and publishers:
American Psychological Association, Washington D.C., USA to quote
A.B. Wood, 'Transference in cliCTt-centered therapy and psycho-analysis". Journal
of Consulting Psychology, 1951, vol. 15, pp T2r-ll.
The American Personnel and Guidance Association, Washington D.C., USA to
adopt and reprint excerpts from:
"APGA Ethical standards—as reported by Seth Arsenian, code of ethics".
Personnel and Guidance Journal, 1961, vol. 40, pp 206-209, and
J.S. Zaccaria, "Developmental tasks: Implications for the goals of guidance".
Personnel and Guidance Journal, 1965, vol. 44, pp 372-375.
Family Service Association of America, New York, USA for reprinting from
Annette Gairett, Interviewing: Its Principles and Methods, 1942.
The Universi^ of Michigan, Anir Artor, Michigan, USA to use material from
Delmont K. Bym's paper, 'The Test Interpretation—Planning Interview'.
Mes^ Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, Mass., USA to adopt material
from Bruce Shertzer and Shelly C. Stone, Fundamentals of Counselling, 2nd edn,
1968.
Messrs Prentice-Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ., USA for quoting from
Lawrence M. Brammer and Everett L. Shostrom, Therapeutic Psychology, 1960.
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, Minn., USA for quoting from
J.W. Gustad, "The definition of counselling", in R.F. Berdie (Ed.), Poles and
Relationships in Counselling, Minnesota Studies in Student Personnel Woric,
no. 3, 1953.


--- PAGE 15 ---
Foreword to the first edition vii
Preface to the second edition xi
Preface to the first edition xiii
Acknowledgements xvi
1  Emergence and Growth of Guidance and Counselling j
Psychology 1
Introduction i
Factors coniribuiing to the emergence of counselling 2
Moral and philosophical issues 6
Economic changes and challenges 6
Educational aspects 6
Mental measurement 7
The mental hygiene movement 8
Progress in psychotherapy 10
Social theories 10
Important periods in the development of counselling 11
Philosophic concerns 15
The potential of man 16
Summary 19
2 Counselling and Related Fields 21
Introduction 21
Definition of counselling 22
Psychotherapy 24
Counselling and psychotherapy 25
Related fields 33
Clinical psychology 39
Counselling as hygiology 39
v^" Counselling as a helping relationship 41
Counselling as a solution to human problems 42
3 Developmental Characteristics of Youth—Common
Concerns and Special Problems 43
Introduction 43
Developmental tasks 43


--- PAGE 16 ---
xvUI Qyntents
Adolescence 44 7':
Erickson's theory of psychological development 50
Socio-cultural factors 56
Problems in the Indian educational context 58
Counselling and Guidance—Expectations and Goals
Introduction 61
Expectations of different individuals 62
Counselling goals 63
Summary 67
5 Approaches to Counselling
Introduction 69
directive or authoritarian approach (psychoanalytic) 70
Relevance of psychoanalysis to counselling 73
Humanistic approach 75
Roger's self-theory 77
Development of self-concept 80
The counselling process 82
Experiencing of responsibility 83
Essential conditions for personality change 83
(j^ges in the counselling process 84,
Behaviouristic approach to counselling 87
Reciprocal inhibition technique 89
Behavioural modification 91
The existential point of view 92
The Minnesota point of view 98
Nature of counselling 99
How counselling is implemented 100
The eclectic approach 101
Summary 105
6 Counselling Process i 07
Introduction 107
Preparation for counselling 108
.^Counselling relationship 114
^Counselling— Content and process 116
Counselling process 121
Counselling interactions 124
Variables affecting the counselling process 127
v^l^unsellor's skills 131
Portrait of an affective counsellor 131
Counsellee factors 132
Summary 132


--- PAGE 17 ---
Contents xix
7 Psychological Testing and Diagnosis 134
. Introduction 134
Limitations of the use of psychological tests 135
Types of psychological tests 136
Factors affecting* psychological test results 137
Test use in counselling situations 139
Test inteipretation in counselling 141
Non-test client appraisal techniques 144
Psychodiagnosis 149
Limitations of diagnosis 151
Common diagnostic classification systems in counselling 153
Summary 154
S Counselling Interview 156
Introduction 156
Non-verbal communication in interview 158
C^nsellee-counsellor relationship 160
Interviewing techniques in counselling 161
Structuring the counselling relationship 162
Degree of lead 163
Silence 164
Relationship techniques 164
Sharing of experience 165
Resistance 171
Summary 175
9 Group Counselling 177
Introduction 177
Case for group counselling 177
Emerging field of group counselling 178
Structuring groups 179
Limitations and assumptions of group counselling 180
^Mgohhnics of group counselling 181
V^>eS of groups 181t^^otl^counselling—its value 182
Th^rocess of group counselling 184
V^rdlvidual and group counselling similarities 186
Differences between individual and group counselling 186
Summary 187
10 Guidance and Counselling In the Educational Setting 188
Educational Guidance 188
Introduction 188
-^^^^uidance needs related to education 190
Aptitudes and interests 191
Guidance at the elementary-school level 195


--- PAGE 18 ---
XX Contents
C
• _ptlidance at the secondary-school level J97
Attitudes and interests 198
Guidance towards life goals 200
Educational Counselling 201
Introduction 201
Counselling the elementary-school child 205
Counselling at high school 205
Counselling at college 206
The role of teachers in counselling 209
Educational counselling and curriculum 211
Counselling and home 212
Evaluation of programmes of educational counselling 212
Summary 213
Vocational Guidance 214
Introduction 214
Theories of vocational development 214
Summary 219
The Process of Vocational Counselling 219
Exploration and contract seuing 221
The state of critical decision 221
Distinction between vocational counselling and
vocational guidance 222
Summary 223
11 Special Areas In Counselling 225
^Introduction 225
Family group consultation 226
Counselling families 227
, Counselling with families concerning children 228.
Counselling with parents 229
Counselling the delinquent 231
Counselling reluctant clients 232
Marriage counselling 233
i^e-marital counselling 234
Counselling women 236
Counselling weaker sections 241
Counselling Drug Addicts 245
Summary; 248
12 Evaluation of Counselling 245
Introduction 245
Problems of evaluation 250
Approaches to evaluation 252


--- PAGE 19 ---
Contents xxl
Problems of measuring change 254
Usefulness of counselling 254
Criteria for evaluation 256
Control of extraneous variance 257
Studies of counselling effectiveness in educational settings 258
Summary 259 '
13 Professional Preparation and Training for Counselling 260
Introduction 260
Counselling preparation and professional issues 261
Academic preparation 261
Practical skills 261
Ethical standards 263
Legal considerations 267
Selection and training of counsellors 267
Conception of a professional worker 268
Preparation of counsellors 268
Important issues 269
Summary 271
14 Modem Trends In Counselling 272
Introduction 272
Counselling and psychotherapy 272
Trends in counselling 274
,^^^ole of a counsellor 275
Career guidance 276
The model of counselling 276
Values in counselling 280
Summary 282
15 The Status of tiie Guidance and Counselling
Movement In India 2S4
Introduction 284
Counselling movement in modem times 285
Guidance movement after independence 286
The role of the government of India and universities 287
Present status of counselling 287
Bibliography 291
Appendices 306
Professional and ethical standards adopted by the National Vocational
and Educational Guidance Association (NVEGA) for all its members 306
Ethical standards: National Vocational and Educational Guidance
Association (NVEGA) 307
Index 31Z


--- PAGE 20 ---


--- PAGE 21 ---
Em®rgmnc® siinidl Growth ©f
Guidsmc® and Counsellm.
Psv/anica>iicaim
INTRODUCTION
When we take a look at the world around, we are instantly struck by its complexi^.
What is significant is that this state of affairs is man's own making. Throughout
history man has pitted his strength against the world in a struggle for survival.
Unlike other living creatures, though similar to them in many respects, human
beings have brought about changes of far-reaching consequences in their
environment. The process by which organisms attempt to meet the demands made
upon them by (heir own nature and by their environment is called adjustment. Living
creatures never cease to adjust. Adjustive behaviour may be more or less successful
in terms of how it meets external demands and satisfies the needs of the organism.
This is a continuous process and is as basic to life as breathing is which itself is
a form of adjustive functioning. Man has not only adapted himself to the world and
its conditions—as he must for survival—he has, to a large extent, successfully
modified the environment to suit his needs. He differs from other living creatures
in this aspect
A significant result of this interaction between man and environment is the
series of material changes brought about in the world. These changes favourably
affect the living conditions and comprise civilization. In his interaction with other
human beings, man has developed a number of conventions, customs, rules of
social conduct and values which comprise his culture. Thus growth, which is a
product of man's interaction with his physical and social environment, has two
aspects that are not always clearly distinguishable—civilization and culture.
Civilization is becoming more complex, requiring concerted efforts on the part of
man to cope with life. The rapid advance of modem science and technology has led
to tremendous progress as well as unprecedented problems. Man has never before
possessed such a fascinating opportunity for self-determination to pursue unexplored
avenues and for enjoying life to its fullest potentialities. Paradoxically, the same
scientific and technologic^ advances that have made our present age progress at a
rapid pace, have also posed many problems and threats which make it an age of


--- PAGE 22 ---
2  Counselling And Guidance
anxiety. The problems of living must be solved first if we are to survive and move
forward. For this reason, the period of one's dependence on adult members during
the early part of one's life is getting progressively extended. A hundred years ago,
men and women were able to enter the mainstream of life in their early teens.
Although in some advanced countries such as USA, many adolescents become
economically independent, they are not considered mature enough for taking up
adult responsibilities. Thus today, most societies both in the developed and developing
countries, characterize adolescence with immaturity and perceive the need for
guidance to make adolescents responsible members of the community. Numerous
forces, often apparently contradictory in nature, influence the speed of change. And
change, as we have already observed, brings into operation a number of forces that
create problems of adjustmenL Some of these forces can be identified as:
1. Developments in science and technology
2. Better communication avenues
3. Economic interdependency
4. Search for a meaning in life.
As people become increasingly enmeshed in the lifestyle accruing from the
scientific age, the psychological consequences and behaviour become more complex.
As people begin to realize the potential for a fuller life that modem technology can
provide, they also become aware of the inadequacies of many existing institutions
and practices, beliefs and codes of conduct accepted by themselves and their
forefathers at an earlier age. As a consequence, while more people hope for a better
life, there is simultaneously a feeling of frustration and anxiety that they themselves
may not be able to experience this better lift which they feel should be available
to them. They search for new anchors, new guidelines for plans of action that hold
promise for realizing some of their dreams and aspirations.
FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO THE EMERGENCE OF COUNSELLING
Technological changes have made a major impact upon people's lives and work.
Industrialization has resulted in social and vocational mobility. It has affected child-
rearing practices also. One of the important ways in which man tried to cope with
the rapidly changing world around him was to start the guidance movement The
guidance movement later led to the growth of counselling psychology in the first
decade of the twentieth century, based on man's concern for his fellow men and
their well-being, particularly the younger members of society.
Counselling must have existed in one form or another since the very beginning
of human civilization. Man must have sought comfort, help and solace from family
and close associates. However, it is only in the recent past that counselling emerged
as a distinct branch of psychology. As part of the broader field of psychology,
couselling, has of necessity, been influenced by the developments within it But it
is, in several respects, a unique field.
Modem counselling is a product of the educational system—more especially of
the American educational system. It has deep roots in the concern for an individual's


--- PAGE 23 ---
Emeigen^ and Growth ofCuldiuics and Counselllr^PsyehoIosy ®
freedom, rights, dignity and worth as a human being. The development of counselling
psychology can best be appreciated by analyzing the various issues that affected
and influenced its development The issues basically stem from man's conception
of human nature. Unfortunately there are several mutually opposed conceptions of
basic human nature. Is human natiue inherently evil, or good, or neuual? When we
refer to a characteristic which is inherited by all members of a species, that is, it
is innate and not learnt, it comprises its nature.
Human nature has been viewed as essentially evil. This view has its origin in
the Biblical teaching that man is bom in sin. Genesis (8 : 21) tells us, "The
imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth." In the early and middle ages,
the idea that human nature was basically evil gained ascendency. According to this
view, whatever the individual desired or longed for was considered evil. Man was,
therefore, not permitted to follow the course of his individual desires. It was,
therefore, the concern of the state, society and community to contain man's evil
nature. Society was seen to have the responsibility to reduce, if not check, it by
means of constant vigil, vigorous disciplinary measures and deterrent action.
As opposed to this view, the Reformation and Renaissance movements propagated
the view that human nature was essentially good. This view drew inspiration from
the conception of God. If God existed. He could not but be good. No religion has
depicted God as being evil. If God made man, man is ipso facto good because he
is fashioned by God, the incarnation of goodness. A great exponent of this view
was Jean Jacques Rousseau (1712-78). He held that man was essentially good and
that it was his environment that corrupted him. Therefore, in Emile, published in
1762, he maintained that the child should be protected from the corrupting influence
of society.
Pestalozzi (1746-1827) and Froebel (1782-1852), the great German educational
innovators, put this view into practice. According to this view, the innate goodness
in man should be drawn out and helped to bloom by removing obstacles that
hinder its growthNThis view is criticized on the ground that if man is by nature
really good, how^n his evil aspects, such as deceit, avarice, crime and so on be
explained?
Many thinkers hold the view that man's essential nature is neither good nor evil,
but is neutral. The modem scientific attitude favours this view. According to die
empiricist and objective standpoint, man is neither good nor bad by nature, but has
potentialities to develop in either direction. When circumstances arc favourable, the
individual is likely to behave in 'good' ways, and when they are adverse, he may
leam to behave in undesirable or 'bad' ways. If man's essential nature is neither
good nor bad, depending on the prevailing conditions and circumstances, man's
actions take the flavom- of goodness or become tainted with evil. Man can be a Dr.
Jekyll or a Mr. Hyde. If suitably helped he can become a creative and constructive
individual and, if misdirected, he can become dangerous to society.
The second dimension of human nature concerns its 'active-passive* aspect Is
man basically an active agent, always seeking new avenues and dtting on his own,
or is he passive, only reacting to the stimulations from the enViixmment? According
to the former view, the individual acts on his own accord; The latter holds that man
acts only when he is compelled to by the environment, because he is characterized


--- PAGE 24 ---
4  Counsellingand Guidance
by inertia and acts only when he must on stimulation. This view has many far-
reaching implications that lead to an essentially deterministic position. The standpoint
that man is an active agent also has very important implications that provide for
freedom, choice and self-determination.
Man acts in.his day-to-day life with the implicit belief that he is free to act in
accordance with his desires and choices. He believes that in choosing and deciding
he weighs the pros and cons and several possible alternative courses of action open
to him, implying thereby that he is free to pursue any course of action he desires
to choose. While this view of himself as a freely choosing individual is self-
comforting, several thinkers discount it and hold that man's belief in freedom of
action or free will is illusory and unreal. They argue that man's actions are actually
determined by forces beyond his control. Indian thought, which has been described
as fatalistic, has from ancient days explained human actions in terms of the doctrine
of Karma. Even in the early Greek thought there is much evidence to show that
they believed in a kind of unrelenting, pre-ordained destiny, from the dispensations
of which none could ever escape. Classical Greek dramatists such as Sophocles
have depicted the inevitability of the pre-ordained end from which there is no
escape. Man is only a pawn in the hands of fate. This theme is brought out in the
legendary story of Oedipus Rex. In the middle ages, also this view prevailed in
some schools of Christian thought. The Calvinist doctrine of prc-destinaiion, for
instance, is a good example of religious determinism. According to it, man at the
time of birth has already been marked for salvation or damnation both inescapable.
In the Persian thought of approximately the same period, Omar Khayyam, in his
Rubaiyat, says:
"Where destiny with Men for pieces plays:
Hither and thither moves, and mates and slays,
And one by one back in the closet lays" (XLDC)
"Thft Moving Finger writes, and, having writ.
Moves on: nor all thy Piety nor Wit
Shall lure it back to cancel half a Line,
Nor all thy Tears wash out a Word of it" (LI).
In contrast to this type of fatalistic determinism, modem science has made
positive cause-effect determinism its cornerstone. According to it, all natural activity,
including human behaviour or action, is lawful. Nothing is without cause. Every
action, however simple and insignificant, must have its necessary and sufiicient
cause. If the causes of behaviour are known in full detail, it should be possible to
explain and predict behaviour. This view is based on the concept of the model of
reactive man. According to B.F. Skinner, the hypothesis that man is not fi^ is
essential for the application of the scientific method to the study of human behaviour.
If carried to its logical end, scientific determinism is essentially pre-determinism,
i.e. all events are determined by what has happened before. The view that man's
behaviour is determined by external factors, if accepted, frees him from the
responsibility of the consequences of his action, as he is like any other lower
organism which is compelled to act in one way or the other (fropistic behaviour)
by external conditions.


--- PAGE 25 ---
Emergence and Growth of Guidance andCounselUiig Psychology S
Rejecting the above positions, the view that human nature could more
appropriately be explained as inieractionist is favoured by many thinkers.
Closely related to this view is the assumption of tlie rationality of man's behaviour.
This cannot be sustained without the acceptance of freedom or free-will in his
actions. For, without fieedom there can be no accountability for one's actions. In
the course of the history of man in the West, belief in reason had suffered several
setbacks. But it emerged as a basic postulate to provide democracy a solid base.
This position assumes that man is capable of directing his own affairs and those of
his society wisely and responsibly.
The conception of man's innate rationally is seriously questioned and deprecated.
Man, it is pointed out, has not been unbiased and unprejudiced in his beliefs,
attitudes and actions. Irrefutable evidence has been obtained to show that social
culmral, emotional and motivational conditions can distort and in fact have distorted
man's thinking and led him to act irrationally. Within the domain of psychological
thought, psychoanalysis and behaviourism have discounted the idea of the innate
rationality of man. While psychoanalysis explains the unconscious id as the major
source of man's actions, behaviourism looks upon man in terms of the mechanistic
model and explains that man is acted upon by environmental stimulations.
Notwithstanding the evidence put forward by them to deprecate man's rationality
which helps him determine his actions, there is sound evidence to suggest that man
is rational in his pursuits. This can be gleaned from man's scientific achievements
which underline rational systematic pursuits in unravelling the secrets of nature.
For, without freedom there can be no accountability for one's actions. This apparently
irreconcilable paradox of determinism versus fiee-will remains one of the perennial
problenrs of philosophy defying easy solution.
The conflicting views concerning human nature suggest that man is capable of
both good and evil, rationality and irrationality and exhibits active to interactive
behaviour within limits. The behavioural patterns need not be mutually exclusive,
for man can be both good and bad, mostly rational but occasionally irrational and
has the capaciy to choose freely in most situations, but occasionally may be forced
to act against his free-will by certain environmental factors and circumstances.
Thus no individual is always good and acts rationally and fieely all the time and
under all circumstances. Yet there can be discerned a pattern of behaviour or style
of life for the individual who tends towards one extreme or other depending upon
the nature of his past experiences. The diverse views of human nature as evil, good
or neutral, have important implications. If man is by nature selfish and destructive,
i.e., evil, society must sh^ him into a law-abiding, useful social being. If man's
natural tendencies are fiiendly, cooperative and constructive, then society has to
promote them by encouraging spontaneity, naturalness and self-direction. Strategies
of restriction and control are to be substituted by the encouragement and fulfilment
of inner potentialities. Belief in the growth potential of the individual is stressed
upon by modon educational philosophies. "The psychologist believes in the dignity
and worth of the individual human being. He is committed to increasing man's
understanding of himself and others."'
^Ethical Standards of Psychologists American Psychological Association, Washington,
D.C., 1963, p.p. 5-6.


--- PAGE 26 ---
Counsellingand Guidance
MORAL AND PHILOSOPMCAL ISSUES
In a highly traditional and conventional society children are expected to follow the
course or way of life traditionally pursued by their forefathers. The individual has
no freedom to choose his vocation, his place of residence, his partner, and so on.
With the development of society, with enlightenment, scientific innovation,
industrialization and urbanization, some, if not most, of the traditional conventions
and values have come to be seriously challenged. They have been bitterly criticised
and opposed by sizeable sections of the society. This is, of course, not without
purpose. In the modem world, old ways of doing things are no longer useful or
even practicable. The growth of liberalism since the Renaissance and the Re
formation has blossomed into what has come to be identified in the twentieth
century as the movement for democratic values. These values are based on the
concept of individual freedom.
ECONOMIC CHANGES AND CHALLENGES
Early man was a food gatherer. As he became civilized, he also became a food
product. With agriculture as the basic industry, man's economic system started on
its long and steady course of development. Today we And that the occupations an
individual can choose from are legion. New occupations are continuously emerging
while some traditional ones are dying out. Consequently, there is a changing pattern
in employment trends. Industrialization and automation have led to increased
productivity. These and similar factors often confuse young men and women about
to enter the job market. Under such circumstances we cannot expiect them to make
appropriate choices without assistance.
EDUCATIONAL ASPECTS
In order to be able to direct one's behaviour efficiently, it is important for one to
understand oneself and the world outside. People must understand their needs,
potential, rational and irrational urges, and other factors of their own nature so as
to obtain a realistic self-image. One's view of the self and the world, whether
accurate or inaccurate, is a primary determinant of behaviour. Coping with personal
and social problems and carving out a good future is not simply a matter of acquiring
information and developing competence. One must also understand the question as
to why one should act one way or the other. A comprehensive value system guides
a person's choices and leads to adjustive behavioiu". This helps us understand the
'Why?' of our behaviour.
Man is the only living creature who finds his own existence a problem which
he has to solve and from which he cannot escape (Fromm, 1955). Human beings
are basically evaluative. Irrespective of their habitat, they are always found to say,
'This is Go<xl', 'This is Bad', and so on. Psychological problems centring around
meaning and values interfere and complicate the adjustive process. Valuing processes


--- PAGE 27 ---
£meigenceandCmwthofCu!danixandO}unseHlngPqKhology 7
ultimately constitutes everything that we feel or think. Every experience, from
satisfying hunger to sloving a mathematical problem, is one such valuing process.
The question of value judgements is crucial to our well-being. If we choose values
that are inconsistent with either the needs of our own nature or the realities of the
world, they only drive us to work towards our destruction.
Our problems largely concern self-direction, our need to solve the uniquely
human problems of understanding both 'Know how' and 'Know why*. Finding
answers to questions such as 'Who am I?', 'Where am I going?* and 'Why?* deal
with one*s self-concept, life plans, value patterns—in essence, with self-knowledge,
goals, competencies and value judgements involved in self-direction. It is an
interesting fact of the educational system that makes us study almost everything
else before getting around to studying ourselves. Yet we must live with ourselves
and our resources in order to be productive and find satisfaction. At the psychological
level, there are equally good reasons for the need for adequate self-knowledge.
Failure to understand the irrational forces in our make-up can play havoc with us.
For many of us, living is a matter of muddling through, rather than u.sing the
knowledge and resources that human history and modem science have opened up
for us. We go through life making many costly and needless mistakes ancf wasting
much of our potential for self-fulfilment Even today, literally millions of people
let their lives be.guided by superstidous assumpUons and common nodons of
human nature that science has already proved false. They are in the wrong
occupations, choose incompatible mates, bring up children by adopting questionable
methods. Beneath the facade of confidence that they present to the world, feelings
of inadequacy and unhappiness often lie deep-seated.
In response to the demands of modem existence many educational innovatimis-
have been adopted. The demand for professional and technical skills has given rise
to different curricular programmes and a veriety of specialized courses are now
being offered. A student needs guidance in the choice of a useful curriculum to suit
his capabilities and aspirations.
mental MEASUREMENT
Modem psychology has been fundamentally affected by the rapid growth of the
scientific spirit, resulting from the acceptance of Darwin's theory of evolution,
Machianism (positivism) and Galtonism (quantitative outlook). From this point of
view, hiunan beings are seqn to be no different from any other organisms. The same
concepts are employed in the explanation of the complexity of human behaviour as
that of the other living organisms. Like all Other living organisms, human beings
react to environmental changes or situations. They are as much a part of nature as
any other living being. Human behaviour, though complex, is predictable and
explainable as our present state is caused and determined by the past factors—a
simple response to simple pressures. A close examination of this explanation reveals
several lacunae in the logic. The idea that 'Human beings are reactive' does not
seem adequate. So it is revised to ihean 'Human beings are reactive in depth' as
a result of the influence of psychoanalysis. There have been several theories proposed


--- PAGE 28 ---
g  Counsellingand Guidance
for the explanation of human nature not merely as one of depth phenomenon, that
is not merely as reactivity in depth but human nature as a process of becoming.
The difference between the two approaches can be illustrated in terms of Aristotle's
quesUon- 'What is the place of man in nature?' and Sl Augustine's quesUon: '
Who am IT The first question refers to 'Man' as a natural being as in natural
phenomena Hie second concerns 'Man' in the process of becoming, man not justmuddled with his past but who is moving out to realize his 'being', his potenUal.
Knowing the true nature of man has been an eternal philosophical question: 'Man
know thyselF. . . .
Towards the end of the seventeenth century, psychologists started evincing interest
in the individual differences among people.. Daring the eighteenth and early
nineteenth centuries the study of individual differences received great impetus. In
the early ykrs this study was concerned with psychophysical functions like sensory
activity motor speed and reaction time. Francis Galton (1822 - 1911) brought
psychological phenomena like imagery into the laboratory for measurement. James
McKeen Cattell (1860-1944). a student of Wilhelm B. Wundi (1832 - 1920),
introduced the study of individual differences in the USA. But the most significant
development in mental measurement took place in France in the first decade of the
twentieth century. Alfred Binet, in collaboration with Theodore Simon, developed
his test of intelligence in 1904. This led to the enthusiastic study of intelligence and
several adaptations and innovations were made in the measurement of human
intelligence. Hugo Munsterberg (1863 - 1916) introduced the concept of applied
psychology in 1912 and this led to the study of aptitudes. Aptitude testing became
very popular after the publication of Walter V. Bingham s (1880 - 1952) epoch-
making book, Aptitude and Aptitude Testing, in 1937. This new ^d fascinating
movement of psychological measurement started by Francis Galton in England and
Alfred Binet in France opened new vistas. With improved techniques of increasing
the reliability, validity and objectivity of psychological measurement, the possibility
of guiding young men and women more effectively and appropriately has become
feasible.
THE MENTAL HYGIENE MOVEMENT
The terms 'adjustment' and 'adaptation' pervade our thinking about mental health.
Tlie society's concept of mental health is reflected in the ideas of school children.
In a study, several thousand children in many countries were asked to write
imaginative stories about men and animals with divergent characteristics. It was
found that the most common theme was that of conformity. In other words, to be
considered mentally healthy one must conform to the behavioural nornis of the
society. Another concept of mental health is that of ^ell=founded personality. The
pressures of society for developing a well-rounded personality are quite relentless.
By the time children reach class three they have been taught to equate divergence
with mental illness or delinquency, hfeny highly creative children apparently seem
odd. They feel their parents and teachers do not understand them. Many societies
abide by rigid concepts of masculinity and femininity (Mead, 1935) and those


--- PAGE 29 ---
Emeisence and Growth ofGuidance and Counselling Psychology 9
whose behaviour does not conform to these norms are considered mentally ill or
delinquent
Wilie (1940) argues that concepts of abnormality vary according to the frame of
reference. Individuals, families, societies and nations go by different frames of
reference. A person may be considered quite healthy according to one frame of
reference and mentally ill according to another. Jahoda (1958) argues that the
criterion for normality both in terms of statistics and in the way people behave is
of little or no use in explaining mental health. To define mental health as the
absence of mental disease is not tenable as there is little agreement amongst specialists
about both mental disease and mental health. A feeling of well-being cannot be
counted as a dependable criterion of mental health. Individuals may be happy imder
different conditions. But to explain their cheerfulness as mental health is not always
valid. Similarly, individuals may feel unpleasant owing to depression or misfortune—
this cannot be considered as an indicator of poor mental health.
Jahoda suggests that mental health, may be considered in terms of the following
aspects of an individual:
1. Attitude towards oneself
2. Growth, development and self-actualization
3. Integration
4. Autonomy
5. Perception of reality, and
6. Environmental mastery.
The individual's altitude towards the self includes self-acceptance, self-confidence,
self-reliance, self-dependence and initiative. One's own ideas and feelings are
available to one's consciousness (and are not repressed and inaccessible). It is
important to see oneself realistically and objectively and accept oneself as 'oneself
is' without distortions, hiding or concealing one's ideas from oneself. Crucial to
this perception of self is identity, i.e. self-regard. Many personality theorists such
as Rogers, Froram, Maslow and Allport stress that man strives to realize his own
potentialities and the realization of these potentialities is self-actualization. A mentally
healthy person has a positive self-concept and is motivated to strive for self-
actualization. He is integrated, i.e. there is a balance of psychic forces in the
individual. He has a unifying outlook on life and has a reasonable capacity to resist
stress. He exhibits a sense of autonomy in relation to the environment and with
regard to decision making. He exhibits a healthy and objective perception of reality,
free frrom distortion and displaying social sensitivity.
Another important cirterion is the individual's ability and success in mastering
the environment. This comprises the following:
1. Ability to love (psychoanalysis)
2. Adequacy in inter-personal relations (Sullivan)
3. Capacity for adaptation and adjustment (Hartman)
4. Efficiency in problem-solving (Humanistics)
Mental health is necessary for the complete functioning of the mind? It is a basic
condition for the growth of mind. Mental illness renders a person incapable of


--- PAGE 30 ---
10 Counselling and (Midanee
coping with reality and robs him of the zest for life and the desire to learn. Mental
health is mandatory in order to be able to respond constructively to stress and
change and not merely to adjust to these factors. Constructive behaviour is a prime
criterion of mental health and should be a major objective of education.
The mental hygiene movement started by Clifford W. Beers in 1909 had a
favourable effect on guidance. Lighmer Witmer (1867-1956) an alumnus of Leipzig
University started the first ever known psychological clinic in 1907 at the
psychological laboratory in the University of Pennsylvania. He also introduced
what he called the clinical method whose avowed aim was to aid and assist the
learning of school-going pupils. In his clinic he successfully treated a number of
retarded children. The work of a number of similar clinics led to the recognition
of the importance of emotional needs in the process of growth as well as in learning
and adjustment. An unfavourable emodonal atmosphere is now recognized as one
of the foremost factors in inhibiting learning and motivation and hampering social
adjustment
PROGRESS IN PSYCHOTHERAPY
The advent of psychoanalysis has had tremendous impact on psychotherapy. This
has led to the need for, understanding the causative factors of psychological
(functional) disorders."!S^ore the formulation of psychoanalysis by Sigmund Freud
the field of psychotherapy was dominated by the medical model, according to
which a disorder is caused by a lesion in the brain, or an injury leading to destruction
of the brain tissue, or by parasitical invasion and destruction of brain cells. All
mental disorders were explained to be caused by organic factors explained as above.
But the medical model used in the treatment of psychological disorders was found
to be inadequate and it was increasingly being recognized that the prognosis of a
mental disorder depended a great deal on attending to the psychological factors.
SOQAL THEORIES
About this time, sociologists and anthropologists such as Margaret Mead, Ruth
Benedict, Malinowski and Boas were studying different societies and their cultures
and had begun to realize the need for understanding the social milieu in explaining
human behaviour. What was considered abnormal in one culture was not so in
another, and it became essential for the psychotherapist to understand the social
mUieu sufffciently while interpreting the symptoms and diagnosis of psychological
problems.
The course of the development of counselling psychology was deeply influenced
by these trends. Thus the counselling movement started with the efforts of a few
dedicated individuals, each of whom was touched by the spectacle of human suffering
and misery arising from wrong or inappropriate choices made by individuals, and
the need to mitigate their suffering by providing suitable help.


--- PAGE 31 ---
Emergence and Growth ofGuidance and Counselling Psychology 11
lAAPORTANT PERIODS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF COUNSELLING
The historical development of counselling may conveniently be classified into three
periods.
1. 1850-1900
During the latter part of the nineteenth century far-reaching innovations in the field
of psychology were made. This period saw the founding of the first psychological
laboratory at Leipzig by Wilhelm Wundt in 1879. Stanley Hall (1844-1924) started
the first psychological laboratory in the USA in 1883. In 1895 George Merrill
established the first systematic vocational programme in San Francisco. Lightner
Witmer heralded the beginning of the counselling movement by founding the first
psychological clinic in 1896. J.B. Miner established and directed the free clinic in
mental development at the University of Minnesota in 1909. However, it was Jesse
B. Davis who first used the term 'counselling'. He set up the educational career
counselling centre in Detroit in 1898. The guidance movement assumed, by the turn
of the century, such importance that the President of Chicago UniversiQf, William
Rainey Harper, stressed the importance of guidance in his annual addre^ in 1899.
Z. 1900-1930
During the fust few years of the twentieth century several significant events took
place. They were:
1. The first convention of the International Congress of Psychoanalysis was
held at Salzberg.
2. Stanley Hall invited Carl Gustav Jung to lecture at the Clark University.
3. Clifford Beers launched the 'Mental Hygiene Movement' with his epoch-
making book. The Mind that Found Itself.
4. The use of psychological principles was advocated in pastoral counselling
by Rev. Elwood Worcester.
5. lite Vocational Guidance Movement was started on a modest scale by
Samuel Frank Parsons and Eli Weaver in Boston and Brooklyn respectively.
6. Guidance was introduced by Wheatly and Boyden in Wes^it and Jessie
Davis in Detroit
7. Binet-Simon tests of intelligence were adapted to American conditions about
this time.
8. The Progressive Education Movement was initiated by John Dewey with his
epoch-making book, How We Think.
9. The School of Social Work started by Mrs. Adolf Myer between case work
and psychiatry.
These movements boosted the efforts to develop knowledge and services in
order to assist individuals in need of help without which they would have wasted
away. In the years that followed, these movements converged pointing to the need
for the application of psychological insights for obtaining and providing a meaningful
base and sense of direction for the efforts to become fhiitful and rewarding.


--- PAGE 32 ---
12 Counselling emd Guidance
Unfortunately, there is a wrong impression that counselling is a poor man's
psychotherapy. It is hoped that with a greater degree of professionalization many
of the prejudices and misconceptions concerning counselling will be dispelled.
The first decade of the present century saw the popularization of the guidance
movement. Eli Weaver published Choosing a Career in 1906. Frank Parsons started
the vocational bureau of Boston in 1908 and published his book. Choosing a
Vocation, in 1909. The state of Michigan started the first city-wide guidance
movement in Grand Rapids in 1912. The National Vocational Guidance Association
(NVGA) was founded in Grand Rapids in the following year. Thus it can be seen
that the vocational guidance movement grew out of voluntaiy efforts in educational,
civic and social work. These events not only signified growing public interest but
2^o concern for the future welfare of the youth. Educationists and administratorstegan to recognize that it was hazardous to leave pupils to fend for themselves.
^ ere were cases of wastage and stagnation, evidences of under-achievemcnt,
instances of redded learning, problems of handicapped children, special problemso M oo eammg, truancy, delinquency and the like, which required close auention
^cher concerned. In addition, remedial measures had to be
IS easy to see that this was a tall order for any individual
«,oo authorities became slowly but increasingly convinced that
efficiently guidance to pupils to help them tonit wfl< evirff.T.t ^ recogmuon of the need for guidance at school,
annronriatp tniWo ^ f®h®ol-leaving youth and the out-of-school youth also required
was started out of sLTet^f occupation. Thus the guidance movementIn the early years InH
informaUontothUounF^^y^"--—^ necessary occupaUooalforTheni'WithTi,^ - u for themselves what would be most appropriate
wfiaeo^r AUies ^tremendous imoetiK general, and guidance in particular, received
Robert Yerkes a876-io?^^ Thomdike (1874-1949) andin 1917 for screening develop the Army Alpha and Army Beta tests
ever known cuestinnnv . personnel. James Hurt Miner developed the first
Fl.. Wells associatioT^ closely followed by R.S. Woodworth and
developed as a screening^^^-psychometric inventory in 1911, which wasPersonal Data Sheet aq9n\ recruits. This was published later as
situation which heloi th • ®®ssaUon of hostUides resulted in an unprecedentedfurther progress Thew ^ movement to consolidate its posiUon and makefrom their normal occiroSnr?^ "prwied thousands of young and middle-aged menat different theatres of ° They had been engaged as defence personnelended the servicemen we ^ Europe and the Middle-East When the hosdlidesof jobs had to be found and they had to be rehabilitated. Thousands
existence at several Dlat^«=« vocational guidance movement which was already in
of the war veterans were purpose. The problemsbeen gainfully employed bmT' Joccupations in which iev hai tradiuonalas members of the defence sei^ ® of competence In addition,services, they had received a different kind of training


--- PAGE 33 ---
Emersence and Growth ofCuldiujce and Counselling P^chology 13
that had also to be taken into account in Hnding suitable jobs. All these factors
afforded ample opportunities for the development of the guidance movement There
was a great need for its services and the movement braced itself to meet the
demand.
3. 1930-1940
In catering to guidance needs, guidance workers looked around for suitable tools
and techniques. The psychometric movement, with its fascinating and interesting
tests of mental functions and abilities, attitudes, interests, etc. began to attract
attention. They took advantage of the new innovations and pressed them into service
with great success. The guidance movement thus developed a vocational bias. It
came to be recognized as the vocational guidance movement as distinct from
vocational selection. In the vocational guidance movement the subjects were to be
apprised of their assets and liabilities (their abilities and skills) so that they would
have a fuller and healthier appreciation of themselves and choose occupations that
were congruent with their abilities. It was appreciated that vocational maladjustment
resulted firom an inappropriate choice of jobs in the absence of a proper and adequate
understanding of one's own capacities and potentialities. Donald Paterson (1930)
of Minnesota remarked that when Parsons launched his vocational bureau he found
his psychological cupboard bare, that is, there were no psychological tests he could
have readily used in guidance work. This was owing to the obvious fact that
the influence of psychometry was not yet appreciably felt. There were very
few psychological tests available and few persons were trained to use them at
that time. Consequently, Parsons had to be content with providing only the
occupational information basic to proper vocational choice. Thus, in the first few
decades, the guidance movement was aimed at providing educational and vocational
guidance.
The post-war situation remarkably changed the character of the guidance
movement The period, 1918-1939, firom the end of World War I to the outbreak
of World War II, saw the publication of books and important psychological tests,
such as Harry Kitson's Psychology ofVocational Adjustment (192^, Qark L. Hull's.
Aptitude Testing (1927) and E.K. Strong Jr.'s Strong Vocational Interest Blank
(SVIB) (1943). The National Vocational Guidance Association (NVGA), founded
in 1913, formed the American Council of Guidance and Personnel Association in
1934, which, later merged with NVGA to become the American Personnel Guidance
Association (APGA). Robert Hoppock, a former Secretary of NVGA published his
book. Job Satisfaction, in 1935. With Hoppock's (1935) work, the guidance
movement ^ded to become more psychologically oriented, unlike the earlier period
in which it was more concerned with school location and provision of career
information. Another milestone in the progress of the guidance movement in this
direction was marked by the publicatidn of L.L. Thurstone's (1887-1955) Tests of
Primary Mental Abilities in 1938. The following year (1939) saw the publication
of the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) which listed 18,000 jobs. The
guidance movement made tremendous progress in the hands of Donald Paterson
and E.G. Williamson during 1930-1940 at the University of Minnesota. Their work
was largely concerned with the objective assessment of the individual's abilities, to


--- PAGE 34 ---
lbs w
Counselllnsand Guidance
help provide him wiih adequate self-knowledge to be able to make mcaning^"^choices.
4^ Second Worid War and After
But the major breakthrough in counselling which finally established itself as a
science in its own right was achieved through Carl Rogers' book. Counselling and |Psychotherapy (1942). Until about the publicaUon of this book in 1942, there v/as |
the provision of counselling as part of the rehabilitation programme. Surveying
field of counselling, Yamamolo (1963) concluded that counselling had developed
a^cei^n amount of hesitation regarding the acceptability of counselling as a fonP (
of psychfitherapyi-Ia ^ Congress, the 'Army Separation and ,'classification and Counselling Program' was initiated and the United Siaf®® >
Employment Services (USES) published the General Aptitude Test Battery (GATB)
in 1945. The Veterans' Administration Authority had become more concerned widt
into a specialized field in psychology with its unique role and functions. But writefS
like Brayfield (1961, 1963) had their misgivings and were uncertain about thefuture of counselling psychology as a specialized field. However, counselUngJl^'
not only stood the test of time but also obtained recognition by the AmericanPsychological Associadon (APA). Owing to the efforts of Professors C.G. Wrcnn.
fj.E. Super, P. Robinson, E.S. Bordin and other psychologists, a mcedng
convened at the North Western University, Evanston, in 1951 prior to the AnnualConvention of the American Psychological Association of September 1951. At
conference, 60 leading psychologists currently involved in guidance and counselling-
were invited to participate. They recommended, among other things, the starting
an independent division for counselling. The report of the conference was publishedin the American Psychologist ih June 1952. The American Psychological AssociatiC
accepted the recommendations of the meeting and designated 'counsellit^S
psychology' as its seventeenth division. The earlier title of the division >yas
'Counselling and Gtiidance'. Subsequently, the American Psychological Associatio'^
also introduced certification and professional examination for counselling
psychologists to be held by the American Board of Examiners in professions
psychology. The first Journal of Counselling Psychology was published in 1954-
This conclusively established counselling psychology as a specialized field or
psychology.
There has been a growing awareness of the need for professionalism. For a long
time the medical men and general public had serious reservations about the credibility
of psychological techniques of therapy. Mesmfer's (1734-1815) work had two-foldeffects: while it popularized mesmerism, it also raised serious doubts in some
circles. Since then the need has been felt for a sound professional basis for
psychotherapy. In course of time, the need for improving the efficiency of training
led to scientific selection procedures. To exercise healthy supervision, a scheme ocertification or licensing was introduced as in other professional fields like medicme.
law, accountancy, etc.
Over the past five decades counsellors have gained overwhelming accept^from society; consequently, a large number of sub-specialities have developed
serve in settings such as schools, mental health clinics, rehabilitation centr .


--- PAGE 35 ---
Emergence and Growth of^ldanceand Counselllrtg P^choiogy 15
community agencies, college personnel services, etc. Hiey incorporate the important
findings of the personality theory, social psychology, counselling psychology and
therapeutic techniques.
The early innovators were mostly preoccupied with practice and were impatient
for practical results. Perhaps because of their preoccupation with results they adopted
a pragmatic approach in the first two to three decades after inception of the guidance
movement Little effort was made towards theory building. When the early guidance
movement, which was pragmadc-in its outlook, developed into a powerful-counselling
movement, the importance and need for a sound theory came to be acutely felt.
Therefore, the attention of counsellors was naturally drawn to this lacuna. The
different approaches adopted by guidance workers and counsellors have led to
different approaches to counselling. Psychoanalysis, as a theory of human personality,
was like a Copemican revolution in psychology and was perhaps the first systematic
attempt to explain human behaviour—normal and abnormal. Theory building in
counselling began with the adoption of the psychoanalytic approach to counselling
needs. However, the different views concerning human nature and man's philosophic
concerns significantly influenced theory building. Thus several theoretical approaches
to counselling are in vogue today.
PHILOSOPHIC CONC£RNS
Counselling as a discipline depends on certain concepts, values and purposes which
together make its philosophy. Without this philosophy, or a kind of theoretical
framework, counselling would be shallow. Philosophy, to a layman, is an exercise
in futility. He considers it to be far removed from reality. He views persons called
philosophers as strange fellows wrapped in abstruse matters of no relevance to
problems of day-to-day life. The famed literary figure, Jonathan Swift (1667-
174S), described philosophers to be engaged in "creating certain edifices in the air"
(Tfl/e of a Tub). But philosophy is essentially concerned with man and his conduct
in its several facets. Philosophy in its true sense can help find a-sense of unity and
purpose in the life of every individual. Understood in this sense, philosophy can be
no more than one's 'way of life' as determined by one's sense of values, ideas of
right and wrong, what is evil and good, desirable and undesirable and so on. There
fore, thinkers such as Aldous Huxley (1894-1963) held that there was no question
of philosophy or no philosophy, what we need is a good philosophy, which would
provide us with a sense of direction and purpose to our actions. Thus an individual's
actions, behaviour, expectations and aspirations all comprise his view of the universe.
All human beings have a unique conception of the universe and of themselves—
this is reflected in decisions taken and choices made in everyday life.
The fundamental problems of counselling "are in the domain of philosophy—
because the very basis of guidance, its raison d'etre, is to be found in a cardinal
philosophical issue: concem for the individual" (Mortensen and Schmuller, 1976).^
®D.Q. Mortensen and A.M. Schmuller, Guidance in Today's Schools. New York. Wiley,
1976, 3rd ed. p. 56.


--- PAGE 36 ---
16 Counsellingand Guidance
Byrne (1963) holds that counselling would be pointless unless it is based on the
worth of man as a value.^ Smith (1966) believes that at the core of counselling lie:
1. Faith in humanity.
2. Concern for persons.
3. Belief in the ^tentiality of human beings for realizing their selfhood and
their developing responsibility for themselves.
4. Groups and institutions which embody and implement the values to which
they subscribe.^
THE POTENTIAL OF MAN
fireedom
The first and foremost phUosophic concern is the potential of man and the inherentcherishes certain values and strives to uphold them as
rvfcn^ -ui psht of freedom to choose. Since he is free to choose, he is
K 1°*^ actions. Man is both the maker and the product of his culture
orafifv V ^ 'o fashion and change by the way in which he strives to live and
thp ^ helpless victim of his culture and chance events in
^thniiTH tv. ff it were so, individual freedom would be a fanciful myth. Man
with itn» / "i determine what he would like to be and he is innately endowedrnncriAM.;. . realizing it himself. It can be obviously seen on critical
nn<» rifv»s determines one's life, but rather what
fflrfni* inni.!.!- ^ mattcfs in life, notwithstanding other extraneous
own life that w-called caprice of nature. And this ability to deal with one's
freedom' ^ is an index of one's enjoyment of individual
fhoiiffhf disagreement among different psychological schools of
formulated hv F ® capacity to act freely. The psychoanalytical theory,over a cnncirte 'hi' °". ®i'^i^°f'''®rapeutic work and clinical experience spread
insiincUve bioIogiMU^/^rf'"®' dominated by hisof an activA a«5i f a • ® unconscious desires. Freud's model of man is that
exoerienwc rfAtAJI.- i'cing driven by instinctive urges. His early childhood
model views ma '^ajor modes of his later behaviour. The behaviouristicof deierminicr« j- Passive, neutral and reactive being. This illustrates a form
Environmenial nrpc^ the individual has no real freedom of action or choice,likes in this svstem his behaviour. Man has no freedom to act as he
Maslow Miirro.. A '.TN^ ®"'^^®®PP''02ch adumbrated in the writings of Allport,
which considArc ih criticizes the behaviourists' mechanistic model of man
humanistic viAu» A situation the major determinant of behaviour. Thensi crs psychoanalytic and behaviouristic models unduly negative.
^  Boston. Houghton Mifflin. 1963, p. 19.Colleee Press Colnmi!- Work—Future Tense, New York, Teachers(.ollege ness. Columbia University. 1966. Foreword.


--- PAGE 37 ---
jDBi - • 5 S' 3-.5096 f)(tQ 0
lUtStllillilHllI :.s and Growth of Guidance and CounssUlng Psychology 17n58.3RAO
The.vhutnanistic viewj emphasizes the uniqueness of the individual and his
potentialities. The existential model of man is akin to the humanistic view in many
respects. The signiHcant point in this view is that it does not place too much
emphasis on man's past as do the psychoanalytic and the behaviouristic approaches.
The existential approach is very much concerned with man's present and with his
predicament It is disillusioned with traditional values and institutions. The
depersonalization of man, according to the existentialist view, has destructive
consequences in leading to a loss of meaning in human existence. It is imperative
that man makes his existence meaningful in terms of his uniqueness. According to
this view man's existence is 'given'. But what he (man) makes of it (the existence
as given) is up to him. It is his essence. Thus it is man's responsibility to give shape
to the kind of person he is to become and to live a meaningful life.
It is not easy for individuals to make life meaningful arid fulHlling in a fast
changing social and cultural world. Conflicts, therefore, are bound to surface in this
age of rapid change in which traditional values no longer appear to be valid and
new or emerging substitute values do not seem capable of guiding an individual's
behaviour. Estrangement with the older people, values and culture, and
depersonalization certainly make man's life in the contemporary world confusing.
This situation gives rise to the existendal predicament which is a challenge to make
living worthwhile. Thus living implies and involves the making of choices. Man is
a choosing agent, he cannot help choosing all his life. He is a free agent, free to
set the goals of his life and he is a responsible agent, personally accountable for
his free choices as they come to be revealed through the manner in which he
conducts his life (Morris, 1966).^ Freedom is the core of living and ipso facto the
source of an agonizing but inescapable burden. Effective life does not consist in
evading or running away from the responsibility of choosing and deciding, and
naturally must bear the burden of responsible freedom. Thus freedom to be is the
real freedom and the individual must pay the price for this.
Man would be able to live more fully if he lived in the present rather than in
the past or future which he could do by not exercising his freedom to choose. If
man were predominantly absorbed with the past, he would be leading a wasteful
life, since what is gone is irretrievable. Too much involvement with the past would
mean running away from the reality of today. On the other hand, an individual may
live for the future. His plight would be no better. A few take advantage of the
lessons of the past to anticipate the possibilities of the future. The life we live today
should profit ftom our past experiences and must be adapted to the possible demand
of the future.
Affecdo'n, Cognition and Conation
There is a strange and unnatural tendency to underplay emotion and to overemphasize
cognitive aspects. But feelings are an integral part of life. Man may learn to live
by suppressing his feelings and developing his intellect. But this would be a lopsided
and an unnatural life. Feeling and intellect are of equal importance and a harmonious
®V.C. Morris, Existentialism in Education, New York, Harper and Row, 1966, p. 135.


--- PAGE 38 ---
/■' . .f
t ■
18 Cowa^Slng and Guidance '
blend of the two helps one lead a full life. Man is capable of development and can
reach the stage of self-actualization if he harmonizes all the aspects—affection,
congnition and conation.
Sovereignty
The next important philosophic issue concerns the sovereignty of man. Is man
subservient to his culture or to his society? Should his needs, ideas and values be
sacrificed when thty clash with those of his society or culture? Should they be
subordinated to those of his society? With the rise of nationalism in the western
world, man was relegated to the background. Political theorists extolled the
supremacy of the state over the individual. After the New World was discovered,
people who cherished individual freedom emigrated to the New World in the face
of danger and despair, and struggled to fashion a society based on the inalienable
rights of liberty, freedom and sovereignty of the individual.
Modem counselling is based on the basic posuilates of individual freedom,
lib^ty and sovereignty. It is rooted in the democratic values of life.
From what has preceded, it follows that the counsellor should not take
responsibility for the client's choices and behaviour. This is firmly grounded in the
belief that the client is as intelligent as the counsellor, and that given proper assistance,
will be able to make rational choices and responsible decisions. In other
words, counselling does not assume to be omniscient and infallible. By taking
daisions for the client, the counsellor would be assuming responsibility for the
client s behaviour and would in effect be treating him (the client) as an incapable,and therefore, inferior being. Such a position would to a lack of regard for the
self respect of the client
Values
It follows that the counsellor has a deep sense of respect for the individual (client)
Md his values and does not in any way take him for granted and make him feel
inferior or insulted. He exhibits regard for the client He does so by respecting the
client s values, his religious beliefs, customs, etc. Counselling aims at enhancing
the client s sense of self-regard- The question of non-interference with the client's
value system concerns the counsellor's view of life. If the counsellor were to accept
a democratic view of life, it would follow by implication that his behaviour would
be modelled on. it namely, the principle of equality. This would ensure that the
counsellor does not look down upon the client's values and beliefs.
Counselling is committed to self-actualization as a basic human virtue. It accepts
the weaknesses of man and the reality of individual differences not as a handicap
or liability but as an opportunity for man to live a more productive and creative life.
Human values are not sacrosanct They are fashioned by man, a product of human
culture, hfen is not a victim of his culture. He is its maker, however, minimal his
part may be as an individual.fashioning the values. All individuals are characterized
by the common motivation of striving towards self-actualization. The concem for
human dignity occupies the central place in the counsellor's system of values. The
first is human frreedom, perhaps a God-given right of each individual to lead his


--- PAGE 39 ---
Emergence and Growth of Guidance and Counselling Psychology 19
own life, to choose whatever he finds desirable and good, and to follow his chosen
path. The second, namely human dignity, is something that man gives to himself
or earns for himself. He maintains his self-regard and integrity, however trying the
circumstances may be. In this, education has a vital role to play. It has to kindle
the urge for preserving one's dignity. This cannot exist where there is no fireedom,
where there is no self-regard and where there is no rationality.
Thus during the last five decades of this century counselling has developed into
an important concern of psychologists and has become a vital part of the educational
system at all levels. Further, it has found its way into such diverse setdngs as
employment bureaux, rehabilitation centres, hospitals and industry. The counselling
movement has permeated into several avenues of our society and institudons. In the
first few years the major thrust of the movement was actuarial, that is, assessing the
individuals' potendalides and capacides by using objecdve psychometric devices
and comparing the same with the expected norms for different categories of
individuals. On the basis of such comparisons the individual's probable success, or
otherwise, was determined. This data were also used to provide necessary informadon
to individuals for their self-understanding. Later, the emphasis shifted to the clinical
approach and this marked the growth of counselling as an important
psychotherapeudc technique. The emphasis thus shifted from guidance, which largely
consisted of providing informadon, to counselling, which comprises aiding the
personality growth of the client.
SUMMARY
Throughout hlstoiy men have been providing succour to their fellow men—
healing their pt^slcal ailments and dispelling their anxieties and fears. The
earliest known healers were the Shaman or religious men and witch doctors of
primitive societies. Gradually, following the growth of modem medicine,
beginning with the work of Hippocrates, the medical profession emerged as the
foremost among the helping professions. Correspondingly, the diverse
psychotheiapeudc techniques employed by healers differed from culture to culture
and from one sodety to another. In the latter part of the nineteenth century
more Interest was directed to p^chologlcal £illments and the explanation for
their causation was sought In p^chologlcal rather than in organic factors. The
work of Freud gave the psychotherapeutlc movement great Impetus. Freud's
depth p^cholo^ tried to explain the cause of several p^choneurotlc disorders.
Along with dils movement was a growing Interest In Individual dlflerences and
their objecttve assessment. In th USA James fAcKeen Cattell Introduced
p^chomotor tests for the measurement of Individual dlfiierences. BInet and
Simon's work In the testing of Intelligence was received with great enftiuslasm.
Attempts were made In different parts of the world to adopt Blnet—Simon
tests. The guidance movement which started at this time, took advantage of fte
p^chologlcal and psychomotor tests of Individual differences. The two world
wars gave a tremendous boost to the progress of the guidance movement.
The world wars brought In their wake several problems of
adjustment of the war veterans, requiring psychological Intervention.


--- PAGE 40 ---
20 Counsellingand Guidance
There was a tremendous demand for p^chlatilceind dlnlcal assistance. This was
not met owing to a severe dearth of trained personnei. Until about this time it
was believed that p^chotherapy was an exclusive preserve of the psychiatrists.
In 1942 Carl Rogers published his epoch-making book. Counseling and
P.^chot/]erapy, and convincingly ar^ed that the distinction between counselling
and p^chotherapy was arhflda], arbitrary and mateiicdiy untenable. The two
fields, according to Rogers, belonged to the same category of the helping
profession. This position appeared plausible as a result of the work of Freud
whose psychoanalytic technique was recognized as a very important
ps>'chotherapeutic technique and was employed by analysts both with and
without medical training. The following years saw the development of other
p^chotherapeutic techniques which were independent of p^chiatry leading to
the dariflcatlon of the scope of different professional fields like psychiatry,
counselling, guidance, etc
During the last five decades counselling has made a significant advance,
though among the several helping professions it Is the youngest. Naturally,
problems of deHnition, aims, roles and boundaries assume much importance.
Counselling as a fleld of knowledge Is diffuse. On the one hand it is invoh/ed
in fonctions bordering on guidance activities like Informadon giving and, on the
other, it is Involved In providing therapeutic assistance to Individuals to help
them gain insight Into their personalities so that they are able to resolve their
problems. Counselling as an activity Is pursued by both anrateur and professional
workers. As an occupation, counselling Is found In a variety of situations, such
as schools, colleges, hospitals, guidance centres, rehabilitation agendas. Industries,
homes etc If past performance is any guide, it can be reasonably stated that
counselling heis to play an Increasingly important role in the future.
It is not only undesirable and wasteful but also a dangerous practice to
improvise 'from crisis to crisis'. Human suffering can be mitigated If timely
assistance Is provided to individuals to help adjust diemsetves better and resolve
their problems before they reach explosive proportions. Counselling, therefore,
has a role to perform. It is very necessary to help Individuals escape Impending
CTlses by resolving their problems through the process of better and more
effective self-understanding, self-direction, self-realization and self-actualization.


--- PAGE 41 ---
CoimnsellmM SLindl
INTRODUCnON
The traditional approach of defining the subject at the outset to help identify the
scope of the field, while useful in a sense, may prove to be a stumbling block.
Therefore, no attempt is made to define counselling at this stage. However, to
provide the beginner with some guidelines, a woddng definition is given.
'Counselling', like the terms 'personality' and 'intelligence', has acquired different
shades of meaning. This difficulty is due to the confusion between popular
understanding of the term and technical and professional meanings of it To counsel
is to advise. Individuals seek advice in a variety of situations. It is evident that from
the earliest times man has turned to his fellow beings for advice, encouragement,
sympathy, comfort and understanding. He has been able to survive his hostile and
hazardous environment only because of the innate concem.of his fellow beings -for
him.
(jhe goal of counselling is to help indiv'«'t"«'ig overcome many of their future
problems. In recent times, nq)id social change caused by industrialization and
urbanizatitHi has led to varied and perplexing problemsJ For most people the pace
of change is simply too fast and creates serious problems of adjustment>This means
that counselling should start early in rchool and should continue in order to enable
individuals to meet vocational and personal problems of adjustment in later life.
Naturally, counselling has to minister to a varied of problems, such as educational,
vocational, marital, parental and personal.'
Parents, teachers, friends, ministers, doctors, nuises, social workers, personnel
officers, lawyers as well as a host of other people give counsel. Their purposes,
methods and training vary enormously. Some give advice and some supply
information. Some help the individual understand himself and his environment, to
meet his needs and to deal with his problems effectively. Some are trained
counsellors, others have had virtually no training. Nonetheless, all of them are
concerned with helping people solve their various problems, ^ince problems can
arise at any time in life, counselling must necessarily be a continuing process
concerning p»sons of all age levels and placed in different life situations.^
*The tnajor objective of all counselling is to help individuals become self-sufficient,
self-dependent, self-directed and to adjust themselves efficiently to the demands of


--- PAGE 42 ---
22 Counselling and Guidance
a better and meaningful life. Individuals are provided assistance to enhance their
personal, social, emotional and intellectual devclopmenL Therefore, the counsellor's
services are preventive, developmental and therapeutic in nature. In order to assist
the clients the counsellor must understand their needs, motives, perceptions, defenses,
etc. In this sense, counselling could be deHned as a therapeutic experience for
otherwise reasonably healthy persons faced with problems. Recording to Rogers
(1942), "Effective counselling consists of a definitely structured permissive
relationship which allows the client to gain an understanding of himself to a degree
which enables him to take positive steps in the light of his new orientation."®
KHNinONS OF COUNSEIUNG
(a popular definition is, "Xounselling is an interactive process conjoining the
counselee who needs assistance and the counsellor who is trained and educated to
give this assistance" (Perez, 1965).' The counsellor can initiate, facilitate and maintain
the interactive process if he communicates feelings of spontaneity and warmth,
tt^^ce, respect and sincerity. ^^^mith (1955) defines counselling as £a process in which the counspllor assiststhe counselee to mate interpretations of facts relating to a choice, plan, or adjustments
which he needs to mate.^
Counselling also has bwn defined as " a process which takes place in a one-to-
one relationship between an individual beset by problems with which he cannot
cope alone and a professional worker whose training and experience have qualified
him to help others reach solutions to various types of personal difficulties" (Hahn
and MacLean, 1955).'
-Pepinsky and Pepinsky (1954) state that counselling is that interaction which (1)
occurs between two individuals called counsellor and client, (2) takes place in a
professional setting, and (3) is initiated and maintained to facilitate changes in the
behaviour of a clienL'"
Patterson (1959) characterizes it as "the process involving interpersonal
relationships between a therapist and one or more clients by which the former
employs psychological methods based on systematic knowledge of the human
personality in attempting to improve the mental health of the latter.""
Blocher (1966) explains it as "helping an individual become aware of himself
and the ways in which he is reacting to the behavioral influences of his environment.
®C.R. Rogers, Counselling and Psychotherapy, Bostori, Houghton Mifflin, 1942, p. 18
Joseph F. Perez, Counselling: Theory and Practice, Reading, Mass., Addison-Wesley,
1965, p. 15.
'G.E. Smith, Counselling in Schools, New York, MacmiUan, 1955, p. 56.
'Hahn and MacLean, Counselling Psychology, New York, McGraw-Hill, 1955, P.6.
'®H.B. Pepinsky andP.Psp\n^,Counselling:TheoryandPractice, New York, The Ronald
Press, 1954, p. 3.
' 'C. Patterson, Counselling and Psychotherapy: Theory and Practice, New York, Harper
and Brothers. 1959, p. 13.


--- PAGE 43 ---
Counselling and Related Fields 23
It further helps him to establish some personal meaning for this behaviour and to
develop and clarify a set of goals and values for future behaviour."^^
Rogers (1952) describes counselling as the process by which the structure of the
self is relaxed in the safety of the client's relationship with the therapist, and
previously denied experiences are perceived and then integrated into an altered
self.'^
•Several counsellors consider the definition given by Gustad (1953) very
comprehensive statement indicating both the scope as well as the function of
counselling. According to him, "Counselling is a learning oriented process, carried
on in a simple, one-to-one social enviroiunent, in which the counsellor, professionally
competent in relevant psychological skills and knowledge, seeks to assist the client,
by methods appropriate to the latter's needs and within the context of the total
personnel' program, to learn how to put such understanding into effect in relation
to more clearly perceived, realistically defined goals to the end that the client may
become a happier and more productive member of society."'"*
yprom a careful reading of the several definitions quoted above, it can be seen
that the emphasis placed on the various aspects of counselling by different authors
is not the same. The early concern was with cognitive factors; later this was widened
to include the affective aspects as well. The counselling process was also viewed
as a one-to-one process and in more recent years the relationship is increasingly
becoming less restricted to a dyadic relationship and the scope is teing widened to
refer to more than one client
Practically all the definitions concur with the view that counselling is a process
which involves bringing about sequential changes over a period of time leading to
a set goal. These definitions stress that the counsellor-counsellee relationship is not
casuaH, matter-of-fact and business-like but that it is characterized by warmth,
responsiveness and understanding.
w/There are quite a few serious misconceptions regarding counselling. It would
perhaps be usefiil to state what counselling is not, to help clarify our conception of
it Counselling is not:
1. Giving information though information may be given.
2. Giving advice, making suggestions and recommendations.
3. Influencing the client's values, attitudes, ^liefs, interests, decisions, etc.,
with or without any threat or admonition.
4. Interviewing clients.
^Counselling is concerned with bringing about a voluntary change in the client.
To this end, the counsellor provides facilities to help achieve the desired change or
make the suitable choice. "The client alone is responsible for the decisions or the
D.H, Blower, Developntenial Counselling, New York, The Ronald Press, 1966, p. 15."C.R. Rogers, " 'Client-centered' psychotherapy". Scientific American, 187, Nov. 1953,
p. 70. j'*J.W. Gt^tad, "The definition of counselling", in R.F. Berdic (Ed.), Roles and Relationships in Coupselling, Minnesota, Studies in Student Personnel Work, No. 13, Minneapolis,
Univ. of Min.hesota Press, 1953.


--- PAGE 44 ---
24 Counselling and Guidance
choices he makes, though the counsellor may assist in this process by his warmth
and understanding relationship.^
PSYCHOTHERAPY
Psychothoapy is concerned with the alleviation of human suffering. Medicine is
the earliest known science which was concerned with human suffering. The sciences,
as we understand them, can be broadly classified into three categories; formal
sciences, empirical sciences and praxeological sciences. Formal sciences arc those
which concern themselves with what 'ought to be* rather than with 'what is*.
Formal sciences, such as mathematics, logic, ethics, axiology are concerned with
non-empirical data. Ihcy are also known as perfect sciences as they are concerned
with the basic postulates and axioms. The empirical sciences are concerned with
the natmal phenomena, that is, the happenings or events in the world. The empirical
sciences are subdivided into experimental and non-experimental sciences. The
sciences, both formal and empirical, are essentially concerned with truth. The third
category of sciences, namely, praxeological sciences are concerned with the practical
application of the findings of the empirical sciences. Under this category may be
considered medicine, nursing, education, psychotherapy and the like. Belonging to
this category of science psychotherapy represents a body of knowledge that gathers
its data from a number of related professions all of which are basically concerned
with the helping function.
Human ailments arc broadly classified into two categories. Though this
classification is crude and does not stand close scrutiny, it is helpful in the
undersinding of ailments. They are (1) organic or somatogenic diseases or ailments,
and (2) non-organic or functional ailments. It has been the traditional preserve of
the medical profession to treat individuals suffering from ailments caused by organic
factors. For a long time in the history of medicine the functional diseases were not
recognized as such. In the dmes of the ancient Greek civilization some of the
functional diseases were looked upon with great awe and admiration. A person with
an epileptic fit was considered to be in communication with God. However, in the
middle ages, functional diseases came to be looked upon as instances of transactions
with Satan. They were supposed to be caused by evil spirits or the devil and the
victims were treated inhumanly. Often they were burnt at the stake. After the
Renaissance and the growth of the spirit of humanism, this attitude towards victims
of functional disorders slowly but steadily changed. It look over ten centuries for
people to recognize that an insane person is essentially a sick person deserving
sympathy and humane treaUnent Philippe Pinel (1745-1826) in France, Benjamin
Rush (1745-1813) and Dorothia Dix (1802-1887) in the USA. William Tuke (1732-
1823) in England and several others stand out in the annals of history as leaders
of this movement With the recognition that bizarre and unusual symptoms were a
'type* of disease, the medical profession took upon itself the responsibility to treat
them. But it did not take much time for doctors to realize the futility of.their
methods. The work of Franz Anton Mesmer (1734-1815) in Prussia and later in
France swept the people off their feet and Mesmerism came into vogue. However,


--- PAGE 45 ---
Counselling and Related Fields 25
it was soon disgraced with the appointment of the French Royal Commission to
investigate the 'cures' and Mesmerism no longer remained a force. About this time,
James Braid (1843), a British physician presented before the Royal Society a paper
on Neurhypnohgy or the Rationale of Nervous Sleep (Allen, 1949).
This ushered in hypnosis as a therapeutic technique. Dr James Esdaile was
known to have carried out not less than 300 major amputations in Calcutta employing
hypnosis. The discovery of chloroform and cocaine have today dispensed with
hypnosis in our operation theatres. The work of Josef Breucr (1895), a famous
neurologist in Vienna, and the discovery of psychoanalysis by Sigmund Freud
opened up new vistas in psychotherapy. Today, the highly specialized branch of
medicine, namely, psychiatry, which is concerned with the treaunent of psychological
disorders has become respectable and monetarily rewarding.
Towards the end of the last century and in the Hrst two decades of the present
century, a new Held of specialization emerged as a link between psychiatry and
psychology. This is the field of clinical psychology. Much later in the history of
psychology, counselling emerged as a specialized discipline.
The term 'psychotherapy', on closer examination, appears to be vague. On the
one hand, it refers to what is patent—the psychological form of therapy. On the
other hand, it refers to a host of psychological therapies, the broad spectrum of
which has hypnosis at its one extreme and counselling at the other. Counselling
thus is a form of psychotherapy.
Robinson (1950) holds that counselling is concerned with aiding normal people
to achieve better adjustment skills which manifest themselves in increased maturity,
independence, an integrated personality and responsibility. Thome (1950) is of the
opinion that counselling is a special type of psychotherapy adaptable to problems
of normal people. Bios (1946) considers that "counselling deals with relatively non-
imbedded proijlem cases, that is, with those persons who have not developed rigid
neurotic patterns, but arc primarily pressurized from the outside environment".*^
Psychotherapy, according to the more orthodox view, is concerned with the
reconstruction of the individual at both the conscious and unconscious levels. Unlike
counselling, psychotherapy is more concerned with alleviating pathological
conditions. Counselling lays stress on rational planning to solve problems of
adjustment. In brief, psychotherapy utilizes psycho-analysis, hypnosis, and such
other psychological approaches for therapeutic purposes. In psychiatry, in addition
to the above, physical and chemotherapy are employed. Counselling, in contrast to
the above, is almost always concerned with such problems as learning difficulties,
minor conflicts involving feelings of anxiety, hostility, etc.
COUNSELLING AND PSYCHOTHERAPY
We have alluded to'Carl Rogers' book Counselling and Psychotherapy (1942). Few
books in the field of psychology have had such a far-reaching impact on the course
'^P. Bios, "Psychological counselling of college studcnis", American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry, 1946.16. pp. 371-580.


--- PAGE 46 ---
26 Counselling and Guidance
of the development of counselling. Rogers was a psychotherapist with a difference.
He had no medical background. He was a clinical psychologist with some training
in ministry. Until his time it was commonly believed that a psychotherapist should
necessarily have a medical background. Rogers exploded this myth. "He destroyed
the gap between counselling and psychotherapy by denying that any difference
existed" (Lewis, 1970). In Counselling and Psychotherapy, Rogers holds that both
counselling and psychotherapy are exactly the same. Modern counselling
psychologists owe a great deal to him for his positive contribution to the technique
of counselling. However, we do not endrely agree with his posidon. We believe
that Rogers has created some confusion in the minds of counsellors and others and
that psychotherapy is a much wider field that embraces counselling in its fold. The
reladon between counselling and psychotherapy has been ambiguous as a result of
the fact that the terms are amorphously defined and loosely used. There arc at least
two reasons for this confusion:
1. The habit of the representatives of the medical profession to include
psychotherapy under the legal definidon of the practice of medicine. Persons
with a medical'background hold that psychotherapy is a concern of the
medical field. Medical jurisprudence has lent considerable weightage to the
posidon that psychotherapy is a medical process.
2. The semandc characterisdcs of the words psychotherapy and counselling
are not strictly the same. For example, the latter is not concerned with the
restructuring of personality. There are other points of difference which would
be of interest. Many pracddoners, medically trained, are obviously at a great
disadvantage owing to their ignorance of the theory and facts concerning
personality change. Psychotherapy is usually concerned with severely
disturbed persons who have to be entrusted to insdtutional care. But on the
other hand, as in the medical field, minor disorders do not require any
insdtutionalizadon. Persons with such disorders are treated as oui-padenis.
Coimselling is a service performed in many sctdng by different kinds of persons
with varying backgrounds. They all represent people with a common interest, viz.
to assist those in need of help to overcome problems concerning adjustment to
various situations in life. This poses some important questions: 'What is the difference
between psychotherapy and counselling? 'Can they be theoretically distinguished
as discrete fields?' A clear appreciation of this issue will help clarify several issues
concerning .the problems of training, practice and special policy in both these
fields. So far clear demarcation between the two has not been made possibly due
to practical difficulties. Neither do we have satisfactory definitions of psychotherapy
or counselling. Attempts to compare one with the other have only tended to present
biased accounts of each to make each appear exclusive of the other. A superficial
comparison made in terms of institutional setting or the function or the training has "
not been particularly useful either.
A close examination of the work of a psychotherapist and a psychological
counsellor reveals that the former sometimes docs what the latter does most of the
time and vice versa. However, tfiere is a significant difference in the nature of the
work that each does. The psychotherapist and psychological counsellor are


--- PAGE 47 ---
Counselling and Relatsd FleJds 27
characteristically concerned with different aspects of the continuum of some
dimensions of individual functioning.
Psychotherapy developed as a therapeutic technique in the treatment of illness
in the traditional model. Later it came to be recognized as an important method of
rehabilitation. Counselling developed in this tradition and psychotherapy initially
aimed at helping those who were very ill and unable to adjust to the demands of
life. Counsellors were seen in this context as those who helped the sick back to
normalcy. In this sense, medicine, psychotherapy, counselling and other similar
fields were cast in the role of protectors and supporters of human well-being.
It is only in the recent times that the role of counselling as an instrument of self-
actualization has come to be recognized. It began to be seen as a means to help
people realize their potential. This is essentially similar to the role of education
which calls for a far more creative role for the counsellor than a merely curative
or restorative one. The common man's stereotype perception of psychiatrists and
psychother^ists as a 'headshrinker' came to be extended to the counsellor also.
This 'headshrinker' notion is not descriptive of a teacher's function. In fact, the
teacher's role is contrary to this notion of headshrinking.
Teaching has also passed through the phases of performing, disciplining,
instructing and supporting functions to the modem view of encouraging and
promoting pupils b^ome more self-reliant and creative. There is a striking similarity
between counselling and teaching; both are supportive and stimulating services.
'~The counsellor, like the teacher, is more than a facilitator. He is an active agent
teaching and helping the client become more self-actualized by gaining deeper
insight into his existence.
In order to be effective, a counsellor cannot function as a mere professional
worker who mechanically applies certain rules-of-thumb methods. He has to be
actively involved as a catalytic agent, helping the client gain the meaning of his
existence. In this process of counselling, the counsellor's behaviour produces the
experience that facilitates the understanding of the significance of the client's
existence. The counsellor employs his knowledge and resources to help the client
solve his problems on his own. Becoming a counsellor is not a matter of learning
how to counsel. Counselling involves understanding of the concept of 'self as
instrument' and regards 'becoming' as essential to it This implies that the focus is
on persons rather than competencies and offers a challenge to creative persons
enable of rising to the demands of individual situations. There cannot be a fixed
pattern of approach to clients.
The concept of teaching generally degenerates into the traditional role of
dispensing advice and maintaining order and siatus quo. Teaching raises the question
'Teaching what?' If counselling is considered similar to leaching, the question:
'What is the role of counselling?* has to be answered. The basic goal of counselling
is self-actualization in the client. The cousellor cannot achieve 'self-actualization'
in the counsellee by a one-sided effort The counsellee has to realize it himself. The
counsellor helps the counsellee in this process. The conception of self-actualization
is fairly new and unfamiliar in the psychotherapeutic context. Adjustment has long
been regarded as a goal of psychotherapy and counselling. A well adjusted individual
was considered a normal individual and a normal individual as an average person.


--- PAGE 48 ---
28 Counselling and Guidance
However, equating adjustment with being average is not exactly welcome. Merely
being average does not make one 'something'. An individual longs to become
'something', achieve something and attain something that would be self-rewarding,
self-satisfying and self-comforting. Maslow has suggested that to be a self-actualized
person one should be a 'fully functioning individual'. Other personality theorists
such as Snygg and Combs referred to 'adequate personalify', Allport to 'self-
folfilment', and Mead to 'self-realization'. The key is that all these theories are
concerned about transcending the static and status quo levels of personality-
functioning. Self-actualization involves positive ways of thinking, feeling and acting
about oneself and in relation to others. Such an individual believes that he is liked,
wanted and accepted, and is able, worthy and dlgnifled. On the other hand,
psychologically sick people, see themselves as being unwanted, disliked,
unacceptable, unable, unworthy and undignified. The coimsellor should aim to
initiate positive thought and action in the counsellee. This depends on the self-
assurance of the counsellor. Thus he cannot be content with merely playing a
supportive role or showing warmth and sympathetic attitude towards the counsellee.
These refer to the initiative of the counsellor, i.e. what he does and not what the
counsellee does. Does the counsellor help the counsellee become independent, self-
supportive and self-reliant, growing or emanating from the 'ego-strength' of the
counsellee? Contributing to the counsellee's positive view of himself goes beyond
the supportive function of the counsellor. A positive view of self is a source of
strength and power. The fundamental goal of counselling is to produce a more
positive self and every act of the counsellor must contribute to this. A counsellor
cannot produce such actions unless he believes in them. For example, we cannot
teach another person that he is able through his own actions unless he finds himself
able. This experience directly contributes to the belief in one's 'ability'.
Change has been and continues to be the basic paradigm of progress, both in the
individual as well as in the society. The notion that an effective teacher should be
an agent of change also applies to the counsellor. Schools must promote excellence,
candidness, innovation, creativity and dynamism among other positive things, in
pupils and help them become responsible, responsive citizens. Schools have often
been criticized for becoming dismal and dreary, stultifying and dehumanizing pupils
and demanding conformi^ from them. Counselling must stimulate the development
of positive ideas and feelings and prevent the growth of negative factors in
educational environments. Schools should be enabling, but not inhibiting, agencies.
There, perhaps, continues to be the mistaken impression that counselling is
•poor man's psychotherapy'. This attitude unfortunately persists in some quarters.
We have only to hope that with a greater degree of professionalizalion much of the
prejudice and misconception concerning counselling will be dispelled.
It appears desirable that the practicality of the situation be considered with some
care. AU clients will not obviously need the same type of treatment The question
arises whether it is in the best interests of the patients and clients in the long run
to invest in a single professional group-the responsibility for the psychotherapy of
different levels of psychological disorders. Much of the confusion regarding the
scope of counselling is a result of the usage of the term in a less professional
connotation. From the earliest times, religious counselling was practised and the


--- PAGE 49 ---
Counselling and Related Helds 29
counsellor was the minister of the congregation to which the individual belonged.
The minister did not strictly restrict himself to questions of religion and faith. He
usually helped the individual with words of comfort and sympathy. In western
society, owing to the nature of their social customs and milieu, marit^ counselling
was found necessary to help assist in the resolution of emotional tensions and
problems. Many marriages were saved from going to the rocks by marital counsellors.
The marital counsellor not only functioned as a source of information on what a
young couple contemplating marriage should know but handled emotional problems
as well. He tried to reduce the conflicts and points of discord which could become
the cause of marital unhappiness. The field of the marital counsellor thus became
specialized.
For those involved in the field of education (teachers, parents, administrators) a
counsellor was one who provided the necessary assistance to pupils. He helped
resolve pupils* emotional problems and identify the cause for underachievement
and failure. He strove to diagnose specific leaning difficulties and helped provide
remedies. Thus counselling has had very close ties with education. Both share the
common goal of contributing to the personality growth and development of
individuals.
In considering the kind of assistance that a person needs, it is necessary to focus
on the personalify role problems along the dimension of intensity of the internal
disturbance. These difficulties may stem from any psychic factor or from emotional
difficulties requiring special learning. The psychotherapist is largely concerned
with the areas of moderate to intense intra-personal disturbances. His primary concern
is with the individual's point of contact with the external world. For the
psychotherapist, the role problems of his clients are of interest because they throw
light on the inner conflicts. The counsellor is concerned with his client's resources
to use them as teaching tools and his most characteristic work need not depend on
the events of 'transference'. He is concerned with areas of minimal to moderate
personal disturbance in relation to some particular problem area. This does not
mean that the counsellor is not concerned with intense disturbances. Both the
psychotherapist and the counsellor are concerned with the client's difficulty in the
role areas. This situation gives counselling its characteristic triadic rather than
dyadic character—the client, the counsellor and the role problem. The psychotherapist
is basically concerned with the felt presence of a problem involving deeper dynamics.
The counsellor is concerned with the interpretation of the client's psychodynamics.
The difference is best expressed by saying that counselling looks more often towards
interpretation and development of the personalify in the characteristic of a specific
role problem. Psychotherapy looks more towards re-interpretation and re-organization
of malignant, conflictual elements within the personalify through the relation with
the therapist. The distinguishing processes are:
1. Ego integration and analysis of infantile conflicts or impulses; attention to
conscious material as against unconscious or repressed material; and
2. Attention to the present as against the pasL
Counselling generally deals with the future: What shall I do with my problems?
Psychotherapy deals with the present: What am I doing that creates my problems?


--- PAGE 50 ---
30 Counselling and Guidance
Psychotherapy and counselling exist because of the need for them in our society
which has become highly complex, multi-valued and multi-roled. Additionally,
society is characterized by great economic and moral changes. This has brought
about serious problems of adjustment for everyone in playing different roles at the
same time or at different times. The situation of having to cope with the multiplicity
of roles and with value conflicts need attention. Counselling and psychotherapy
have developed to help individuals find appropriate strategies to function in relation
to their personalides and the roies they are called upon to play. Personality and
roles are often antagonistic but they go along. The roles are reasonably broad
culQual patterns or forms through which individuality is expressed. This freedom
to create an Identity through individual integration in playing the available roles
also integrates them uniquely and characteristically. Overt behavioural or action
patterns are the manifestations of personality. The interaction of personality and
situational demands generates and confirms the individual's sense of self-hood.
When problems arise, psychotherapy and counselling become useful.
Problems may arise in the developmental process of personality or in the failure
of personality to cope with the demands of role performance. They may arise owing
to the transition from one role to another, from role choice, or from conflicts among
different roles, or in the role expectadon due to the complexity and fluidity of
social environment Counselling, or psychotherapy are conceived as assisdng or
helping processes to provide optimal conditions in which individuals are required
to deal with problems of personality growth. A clash of roles in the individual's
psychodynamics leads to intra-personal conflicts and problems such as ambivalences,
guilt feelings, inhibidons and so on.. The problem could also be caused by fixaUons
at different levels of' psychic development Specific learning problems resulting
from inoblems such as vocadonal choices and marital adjustment also need to be
resolved. Conflicts may vary in intensity depending on varying degrees of intra-
psychic conflicts which may be independent of the immediate environmental
conditions. What usually determines how well a person uses his potential in resolving
problems or how rapitUy he learns or integrates, is the extent to which he is free
from <»• is afflicted by disrupting internal tendencies.
Psychotherapy is the treatment of problems of an emotional nature by
ptychological means. Counselling also treats such problems by psychological means,
the difference being that in counselling, the emphasis is on the individual. The
treatment is started with the establishment of a professional relationship between
the therapist/counsellor and the patient/client. The object of this relationship is to
remove, modify or retard (lessen) the existing symptoms and promote positive
personality growth. Though there are no differences between psychotherapy and
coimselling, certain distinctions are made and these need to be examined at some
length. The distinctions are made on the basis of:
1. Individuals receiving help.
2. Persons giving help.
3. Severity of the problems concerned.
4. Setting in which help is rendered.
In psychotherapy, it is customary to designate the person receiving help as


--- PAGE 51 ---
Counselling and Related Fields ^
•patient* and in counselling as 'client' although this distinction is only superficial.
Further, in some institutions, both psychotherapy and counselling could be carried
out simultaneously. For instance, a patient discharged from a mental hospital may
still receive psychotherapy and rehabilitation counselling.
The persons who undertake psychotherapeulic treatment are usually called
psychiatrists, while those who counsel are not included in this group. Psychotherapy
can be further distinguished from counselling on the basis of the training of personnel.
There is a basic difference in the training of psychiatrists and counselling
psychologists. The psychiatrist has a basic medical background while the counselling
psychologist has no such training. In the same way the psychiatrist may not require
the kind of training in the psychological field that a counselling psychologist would
have to receive. In recent times more emphasis is being placed on professionalism
in counselling. The learning theory, personality theory, principles of psychological
measurement, psychodiagnostics, etc., are not basic to the training of a psychiatrist.
These are of vital significance only to the counsellor.
A distinction could be made in terms of specific goals and the manner in which
they are achieved. In psychotherapy the goal is to overcome certain weaknesses by
any practical means, including psycho-surgery. The counsellor, on the other hand,
is concerned with the identification and development of positive strengths in the
individual. This is done by helping the client b^ome a 'fully fimctioning person*.
The techniques employed in the two fields may be disparate. In psychiatric
psychotherapy the treatment is physical, that is, it is either through the administration
of drugs, electro-convulsive therapy or psycho-surgery largely on the organic basis,
in terms of the medical model of ueatmenL On the other hand, in counselling,
results or objectives such as ego enhancement, self-integration and self-direction
are secured through the psychological techniques of establishing rapport and
providing warmth and support to the client to help him gain insight into himself.
The counselling process is essentially a learning process.
According to Patterson (1973), the two disciplines overlap greatly. Both draw
their inspiration from the same personality theories. If we were to examine the
definitions of each, we would notice the following similarities:
1. The specific kind of relationship between the therapist/counsellor and the
client.
2. The techniques employed by both of them.
3. Their objective which is essentially to assist the patieni/client.
Tyler (1958) attempts to distinguish counselling from psychotherapy on the
basis of the ^pe of ailments treated by them. She states that it is ncft the job of
counsellors to remove physical or mental handicaps. According to her, such disorders
fall in the domain of psychotherapy. However, viewed in the light of the American
Psychological Association's statement (1956) on the scope of counselling
psychology—^"to help individuals toward overcoming obstacles to their personal
growth, wherever these may be encountered, and toward achieving optimal
development of their personal resources"—^it is seen that the functions of counselling
are practically the same as those of psychotherapy. Hence Tyler's distinction appears
far-fetched. Another distinction very frequently made is in terms of the nature of


--- PAGE 52 ---
^2 Couns^lns snd Guidance
the clients treated by the two. Oiunselling is said to deal with normal individuals
whose problems are related to the developnient of their potentialities. On the otherhand, psychotherqiy is supposed to handle clients who are "deficient in some
respect" (Vance and Volsky, 1962). The distinction obviously cannot be sustained
on closCT scrutiny. Both the clients in counselling and the patients in psychotherapy
could be said to be deficient in some respect, that is, they have adjustment problems.
In Patterson's (1973) view the term psychother^y is used for the treatment employed
to remedy the patient of his emotional distuit^ces of a deep-lying and seriousnature. On the other hand, when the disturbances are not serious enough to
incapacitate a patient but are like the problems of a normal person which interfere
with the development of his potential, it is called 'counselling*. Patterson remarks
that "the so called counsellors practiced psychotherapy while psychotherapists
practiced counselling". The counsellor need not and often cannot limit himself to
working with 'normal clients*. The distinction made on the basis that the counsellor
works in a non-medical setting while the psychotherapist works in a medical setting
is superficial and cannot be sustained. Ibe clients in counselling are supposed to
be 'reality oriented', that is, their problems, are conscious. Most of the problems
dealt with by counsellors, it is claimed, are concerned with making educational and
vocational choices. Psychotherapy, on the other hand, is said to be exclusively
concerned with problems emanating fiom the personality of the clients and are
primly related to the unconscious. This distinction cannot be sustained on close
examination. According to mostauthorities, counselling deals with all the dimensions
or domains of the client's personality—cognitive, affective and conative. Hence
coimselling approaches psychotherapy very closely when it handles affective
problems. However, when- no affective problems are involved, counselling is
^owedly most differentiated from psychotherapy. If this were true, it could perhapsbe at best information giving or discussing, but not counselling.
RELATED FIELDS
^e synth^esis of ideas for counselling as an aspect of guidance has been recent. Bybroad and general consensus, counselling:
\  concern^ with normal people.■x p personality 'strengths' as assets of the counsellees..  mp asjzes cognitive ability involved in choice and decision making.
Perry, Hummel, Tyler and others stress the counselling model that
tiiTaffeSve emotion, that is. cognitive problem-solving andIf aeteminants of behaviour. Perry identifies two dimensions ofcounse mg—me diction of regard and the intensity of involvement. For him,wunseUing should focus on social roles with which the individual is concerned.
Cou^mng IS not diluted towards bound aspects of personality or psychodynamics,that IS, themter-play of instinctual and unconscious forces affecting human behaviour.
The counsellor works with clients on the pertinent role problems. The intensity ofcotinsellmg relationships will be significantly different from what is typical of


--- PAGE 53 ---
CounseiUng and Related Fields 33
psychotherapy. Transference will be at a minimum. Counselling would mean
problem-solving by aiding the counsellee learn the skills of making choice and
managing life's roles. Bordin also emphasizes the counselling model directed towards
the problem-solving process. Counselling follows rational elements in the process
rather than on the intensiQ' of affective areas. This does not deny the reality of
emotional and irrational forces. Bordin suggests a congnitive—conative balance.
The counsellor acknowledges the conative process and works towards enhancing
the congnitive factors. Bording emphasizes ego functions of thought, planning and
problem-solving. The framework of ego processes becomes the basis for a viable
counselling theory.
RELATED FIELDS
{ Several terms have come to be used along with, and often synonymously with, the
^brm 'counselling*. For example, we sometimes speak of guidance and in certain
special contexts we use the expression 'counselling and guidance*. In the same way
we may use 'student advising* interchangeably with 'guidance of the students*. It
is necessary to examine these terms before we can give a proper definition of
counselling.
Advising
It is nattual for human beings to have problems. In most problematic situations,
individuals seek the assistance of others. Sometimes this assistance may be merely
material in nature. One could be in great need of money and approach another
individual for monetary help: Obviously we would not c^l this advising. On the
other hand, an individual may face the problem of taking a decision or making a
choice. In this event, he may approach another individual for assistance. This
situation has several important features:
1. There is an element of voluntariness.
2. There is a belief (right or otherwise) that the other person has the necessary
experience, wisdom and ability to advise.
3. The advice is sought for consensual validation.
4. The advice given is not binding on the person who seeks it, that is, the
person may reject it and approach another person for assistance which in
turn may be rejected if found tmsuitable.
Advising has no psychological implication regarding individu^ development. A
person in difficulty may seek advice on the problem confinonting him at the moment
He may receive help towards the solution of his problem and thus solve the problem.
But on a future occasion, in a similar predicament, he may not be able to resolve
his problem without any outside assistance. The individual may have to seek outside
assistance every time he is faced with a problem. Thus each piece of advice is
helpful only in a particular situation, that is, it has a very limited role to play. There
is another sense in which advising is sometimes used. On several campuses of
American universities, academic advising is a common feature—in fact it is a


--- PAGE 54 ---
34 Coims^lng and Guidance
characteristic feature of the Amttican system of education. Academic advising is
concerned with the specific relationship between a faculty adviser and a prospective
student
Parents and teachers often give advice. They suggest solutions that seem
appropriate to them. Often, parents appear heartbrokM and teachers resentful that
their advice goes unheeded. This attitude is psychologically inappropriate and
stultifies the very process of psychological growth or maturation as it makes children
dependent, anxious and inadequate.^
Guidance
juiSance, another popular term, has been defined in many ways. While there are
fferences among them, there is broad agreement that the objective of guidance is
essentially to render help. Sometimes it is used synonymously with the term
counselling. But more often it is used with the preposition 'and', as in 'guidance
and counselling'. Guidance is the assistance given to individuals in making intelligent
choices and adjustments. It is based on the conception that it is the duty and the
right of every individual to choose his/her own way of life as long as his/her choice
does not interfere with or infringe on the rights of others. It is based on the belief
that the ability to make such (intelligent) choices is not innate but like other abilities
must be developed. Every individual is potentially capable of achieving his goals.
But from childhood he is continuously hampered by internal conflicts or external
barriers. He has to learn to overcome the internal obstacles and fiw his latent
creative power. This can eliminate wastage and destructiveness arising out of internal
conflicts. The internal conflicts indicate that human beings are essentially emotional
creatures. The intellect is only a minor portion of the total personality. Higher
levels of achievement can be enormously enhanced by a constructive combination
of feeling and intelligence. The importance of this aspect of emotion and feeling
has long been stressed by great thinkers and teachers. They have also emphasized
the TOi»rtance of developing appropriate attitudes towards society and its problems.
One s likes and dislikes, one's longings and aversions really determine one's strivings
and manner of progress. The truly professional contribution to human welfare is in
the area of emotion. -The guidance counsellor has a unique opportunity to help
clanfy the role of emotions both in their positive and negative aspects. With his
grwt potential, an individual can achieve within limits, whatever his perceptions of
self allow him to. He can rise to the challenge of becoming a productive person in
fulfilrhent of potential for becoming—a life-long task.Guidance is essentially a helping process that comprises providing material or
non-matenal assist^ce to solve a problem which an individual may be facing at
a given time. Although help from an external intervention or source may help
overcome a i^oblem here and now, however, it does not guarantee or obviate the
occurrence of problems in future. Guidance in its psychological connotation is
more tiiM mere provision of help for the solution of the problem on hand.. It
consists in helping the individual help himself without having to depend on others.
In other words, it helps make the individual self-dependent and self-directed. The
helping process, psychologically speaking, is broadly of two types:


--- PAGE 55 ---
Counselling and Related Fields 35
1. It promotes the utilization of one's own potential; .
2. It helps the onset of change in one's persoanlity for desirable adjustment.\
Guidance is concerned with the former, viz. helping to bring about the best possible
utilization of the individual's capacities and the available environmental resources.
Counselling is concerned with the latter, viz. change. Therapy is its goal. Personalia
change in a small or big way contributes to personality growth and development'
of the individual. Understanding the difference between change and utilization is
important. A guidance counsellor helps facilitate education^ and occupational
choices. This can best be explained as utilization of available capacities and resources
rather than change in the individual's personality. On the other hand, when the
client has a personality problem the aim is to bring about a change in the client.
This is normally referred to as therapy. Of course, there is some ambiguity in the
use of the term 'therapy'. In counselling, some kind of change is brought about in
the client which is essentially therapeutic. It is commonly believed that therapy
should aim at bringing about as much personality change as possible. This notion
owM its influence to psychoanalysis which has personality re-organization as its
go^■in contrast, what is attempted in counselling is often a minimum change in
personality. The guidance counsellor tries to help the counsellee discover for himself
some blocked path, the clearance of which enables him to move forward. To be
more specific, the change sought to be brought about through guidance is one of
direction rather than quantity. By facilitating a change, the direction is sought to be
changed. The distinction to te borne in mind is that in psychopathology, the client's
weaknesses are diagnosed and the necessary therapy made available. In guidance,
however, the attempt is to discover the counsellee's strengths. A person who knows
his real strengths can choose and act according to them, leading to healthy adjustment
Guidance helps the client discover his personality and decide how best he can use
his assets and overcome the obstacles in his path.
Another important aspect in guidance is the manner in which the situation is
structured for the client, taking into account his expectations and goals as well as
the counsellor's. For example, an individual may be profoundly dissatisfied with
life. He may really be looking for a good change. Therefore, what may be actually
necessary is a small shift in direction rather than major changes. However, the
client may not be satisfied with this suggestion. The counsellor has to persuade the
client to discover for himself what his personality is like in terms of his interests,
attitudes, etc. and decide for himself how he can overcome his obstacles and move
forward. The next important feature is the use of counselling relationship to reduce
the client's anxiety. What the client needs is support, not shallow reassurance and
encouragement of dependence. Support is the act of lending the counsellor's strength
to the client to help him make the appropriate choices. The basie premise of this
kind of help to be provided through guidance comes from the psychology of
development and individual differences rather than from psychopathology and
psychology of adjustment. The assumption is that there are many different ways of
living and it would be best for the individual to make his own choices on the basis
of knowledge of self and situation. He has to choose such that he can live life in
his own way. Guidance thus has basic respect for the counsellee (unconditional


--- PAGE 56 ---
36 Counselling and Guidance
self-regarcO and views the help he provides as enhancing the counsellee s freedomof choice, responsibility and commitment to his choice.
The guidance counsellor should have in his mind a model for guidance. Different
guidance counseUors have different models depending on personaUly, preparation
and goals. However, there are some common features. AUport outlined three common
models of guidance:
1. Hie first views man as a 'reacdve being'. In psychological terms, this could
include naturalism, positivism, behaviouiism, operadonism, physicalism—
all included under sciendflc psychology.
2. The second model views man as a 'reacdve being in depth*. This would
include psychoanalysis, psychodynamics and the like. This view ignores the
possibility of creative or cognitive development or transformed personhood.
3. The third model views man as a 'being-in-the-process-of-becoming*. This
view is held by several theorists with different backgrounds. From the
psychoanalydc tradidon, Adler, Jung, Hartman, Homey, Erikson and Fromm
have expressed this view. Goldstein, Maslow, Rogers, White and others
emphasized this view as an essenUal characteristic of human nature. The
guidance counsellor following this point of view strives to develop an atdludeof tentadveness of outlook. Modem science has convincingly demonstrated
that there is uncertainty in the phenomena of nature, (Heisenberg's 'Principle
of indeterminacy*). If the growing individual cultivates the outlook of
lentedveness, he can fearlessly and cridcally examine all dogmas—cultural,
social, religious, etc. for what they are worth. It creates a posidve view of
the world and of one's own capacides. In this process, one may lose but also
gain equally. Loss or gain can never be a matter of absolute certainty.
William Jarnes stressed in the beginning of the present centiur how uncertainour founttodons of values are. Like Cardinal Newman, James recognized the
constructive power of commitmenL Any ideal that leads to long-range
Mnstrucdve consequences is pragmadcally true and psychologically sound.
Tentadveness and commitment represent disintegradve and integradveaspects. A sound blend of these leads to an appropriate perspecdve. This
can be helped to develop through guidance.
Gtiidance is a friendly concern to help an individual strive to develop a posidve
outlook.
The three models are important for guidance. The concepdon of man as a 'reactive
bemg may be e3q>lained in terms of stimulus and rt^nse (S —> R) behaviour. Different aspects^in the enviromnent stimulate the individual who responds to them.
Understood In this way, a human being is no different from any other organism,
simple or complex, which may be studied biologically. A few concepts and principles
^wn from a careful study of organisms can explain any complex type of behaviour,
including that of the human beings.' The question, 'What does it mean to be a
human being?' needs no special answer other than that a human being is a more
complex organism and his behaviour reflects this complexity. It is predictable in
principle as all behaviour can be explained in cause and effect relations. While the
S -> R position may explain most of human behaviour, it does not and cannot
explain all of it, because it does not consider a human being's consciousness as a


--- PAGE 57 ---
Counselling and Related Fields 37
determining principle. A critical examination of human behaviour reveals the
shallowness or inadequacy of the principle of man conceived as 'reactive being* to
explain human activity. Often the parent, the teacher, or the administrator finds the
child or the pupil or the individual behaving in a manner that baffles his expectations
and understanding.
Further, in terms of this conception, human nature is viewed essentially as
passive and dependent on external factors. The model of man as a reactive being
in depth explains behaviour in terms of principles such as regression, reaction
formation, and the like—all based on the psychoanalytic view that individual's
reactions are also caused by internal forces usually unconscious in nature.
Psychoanalytic causation explains in terms of the past history of the individual as
the 'conditioned response' for behaviourists is the explanatory principle. On the
basis of the model of 'reactive being indepth', the principles of recall and recovery
are central to guidance. Accordingly, guidance and counselling are carried out by
unearthing and disclosing to the client the troublesome, repressed traiuna. There is
no place for an individual's capacity to disregard his past or reshape himself freely.
As 'id' by nature does not change, the future can at best be 'redirected' and not
transformed. In other words, what one becomes is what one is, and what one was.
In Freudian terms, an individual seems never to be truly pro-active or even active.
Almost all the time he is reacting to some fixations and unconscious complexes,
One of the prime functions of education is to provide opportunities for the wholesome
development of such abilities among pupils. Guidance, in this sense, is an integral
part of education.
It is customary to use guidance as an important service in an education system.
The process of academic advising referred to earlier can be considered as an example
of guidance. Guidance essentially consists of giving information. The pupil or
individual seeking guidance is expected to make his own choices. The person
giving guidance does not choose but helps in choosing the more desirable or most
appropriate course of action. It is aptly said that 'guidance helps individuals to help
themselves'. It helps them make their own choices in such a way as to promote or
stimulate the gradual development of the ability to make decisions independently
without having to take assistance from others. The essential function of guidance
is to help make individuals respon.sible. Traditional education concerned itself with
the 'three Rs', reading, writing and arithmetic. Modem education, in contrast, is
concerned with 'four Rs', the fourth being responsibility. Individuals in a free
society which cherishes democratic values are free. They are ipsofacto req)onsible
for their actions—good, bad or indifferent. Guidance as a service believes that
individuals of average intelligence should be able to choose the right and discern
the wrong. They should act voluntarily and not out of compulsion.
Guidance thus comprises the giving of information. The housewife needs to
know the daily prices of provisions, the investor about the stock exchange rates, the
marketing manager the consumer trends, and so on. Different pec^le require different
types of information at different times. The information required may be as simple
as the arrival and' departure timings of a particular train or as complex as the
information required in making a vocational choice. Guidance thus, in its simplest
sense, is to render help, to those who seek it by providing reliable and dependable
information.


--- PAGE 58 ---
38 CotmselUns and Guidance
There is a general agreement that counselling is a very significant aspect in any
model of guidance. Some consider individual ot group counselling the core of
guidance. Counselling stresses the importance of in-depth exploration of feelings
about self and the confidential nature of the client—counsellor relationship. Rogers
(1951) holds that if the individual is provided an understanding of the way he sees
himself, he can do the rest in helping himself. This view emphasizes the growth of
self towards self-actualization and self-realization. The term 'guidance' is often
used synonymously with counselling. It involves highly sensitive listening with
empathy and 'unconditional positive regard*. By exclusively emphasizing the
emotional or affective component of a client's personality, the counsellor creates
a role that is non-translatable (and this is quite unintelligible to educational personnel),
counsellmg as a means of enhancing the ability for more effective personal choiceassumes a significant part of the professional role.
of Counselling In Guidance
develOTmeif^T^^ complementary educational function, assisting normal^^^tion of personal
point of vieiT^unsemnS™ ^ effective personal decision making. From thisindividual counselline ^ an aspect of guidance. Equaling
behavioural science ofwht-h^l n?® ^ Guidance is an appliedbetween counselUne and ^ aspect. Defining and differentiating
ambiguity reKardinff irTlf -r"'^ ®®sides. there has been a lot ofon guidance and counselling reflects the uncertainty with which viewsthat the current position presented. Lortic (1965) holds
McCuUy could not find anv ^ ® diverse contradictory function,
services offered by the counvn"^^^"^ nature of the essential and primaryof the guidance function Counselling may represent one of the servicesIn counseUing, as in guidance r
two arc not the same. While * f information is given. But the
information-giving is not cou " necessarily ^ven in counselling, allboth counselling and guidan" ^ information is given incounselling differs fixim guidanr^r • appear to overlap. But
in which guidance services fun f ^ therapeutic. The most important area
other hand, may function in sev i ^ ^® ^'®^^ education. Counselling, on theeducation and industry. settings and may include such diverse fields as
The most important and non.iia
vocational guidance. Vocatioi^ ^ ®si^t of guidance is generally known ascareer information concemine ^r^® ^ giving detailed and essentialrequirements, demands, limimti vocational avenues, understanding the
choosing a particular vocation Prospects of vocational development,
understanding of one's own neeS ^ another in the light of a fuUerthe job requirements as well as^l ?^®®' aptitudes and interests, and knowingeducational guidance If we cq- . °"®'^-however, vocational guidance implies
career, the choice of a vocation iJ!r® as a preparation for a suitablea pupil who has not offered course(s) offered. For example.reatnemaucs would not be acceptable for enrolment in


--- PAGE 59 ---
Counselling and Related Fields 39
an engineering course. Thus he would be denied the chance of entering the engineer
ing vocation. Thus vocational guidance should go hand in hand with educational
guidance. Whhout the latter, the former may not be fruitful and may even become
impracticablpOne of the differences between counselling and guidance is that, unlike guidance,
counselling has a therapeutic function. If counselling is therapeutic in function, it
follows that counselling is a form of psychotherapy. This issue raises the question
of how psychotherapy is related to counselling.
CUNICAL PSYCHOLOGY
Clinical psychology is concerned with the description, classification, diagnosis and
prognosis of psychological illnesses. The clinical psychologist usually functions in
a clinical setting, in a hospital. Usually the clinical psychologist is found working
in close association with the psychiatrisL We may, therefore, subsume it under
psychiatry which is usually concerned with the treatment of severe psychological
disorders like psychoses and neuroses. The clinical psychologist aids and provides
assistance to the psychiatrist usually in the diagnosis and evaluation of psychological
disorders.
The number of clinical psychologists, though large, is still very inadequate to
meet the demands of the growing population. In ideal circumstances the ratio of
counselling psychologists to the population must be much higher than it is in the
case of clinical psychologists or psychiatrists. Psychiatry is concerned with severe
psychological disorders requiring institutional care. The psychotherapist deals with
less severe psychological disorders that do not require hospitalization but which
seriously or adversely affect ease of adjustment Apart from these two categories
we have normal individuals exhibiting transient problems of maladjustment of a
less severe nature.
COUNSELLING AS HYGIOLOGY
Hygiology is the study of the problems of normal people and the prevention of the
incidence of serious emotional difficulties. Counselling could be more appropriately
concerned with hygiology than, with psycho-pathology of behaviour. According to
Coleman (1973, 1976), the estimated incidence of major maladaptive behaviour
patterns from the available statistics in the USA for the years 1970 and 1975 is as
follows:
Maladaptive Behaviour Pattern Estimated Number of Cases In
1970 1975
1. Neurotics
2. Chronic high blood pressure patients
3. Psychotlcs
10,000,000
20,000,000
2,000,000
20,000,000
20,000.000
3,000,000
(Contd)


--- PAGE 60 ---
40 CounselUng and Guidance
Maladaptlve Behaviour Pattern Estimated Number
1970
of Cases In
1975
4. P^chopaQilc or antl-sodal personalities 4.000.000 5,000,000
5. Alchohollcs 9.000.000 12,000,000
6. Dntg addicts 1,000,000 2,000.000
7. Emotionally disturbed persons 5,500,000 6,000,000
8. Attempted sulddal cases 200,000 200,000
9. Involvement In crimes 1,500,000 1,000,000
10. College withdrawals 1,000,000 1,000,000
11. Mentally retarded persons 6,000,000 6,500,000
According to Coleman (1976) the number of patients in state and country mental
hospitals from 1880 to 1973 based on the available statistics is as follows:
Year Population In Minions No. of Patients In
Mental Hospitals
1880 50 41,000
1923 111 268,000
1955 166 560,000
1966 197 452,000
1970 205 350,000
1973 isn 348,000
The number of persons who are reported to have one kind of maladjustment or
another has been on the increase from year to year.
The figures presented above speak for themselves. There is a compelling need
to do something very tangible and effective to check the increase in the incidence
of mental iUnesses. The necessary statistics for India are not available and it can
be safely assumed that the incidence may be of the same order as in the USA, if
not more. Community health programmes and counselling services have to be
resorted to in order to provide the necessary help.
The psychiatrist, the clinical psychologist and the counselling psychologist are
all concerned with psychotherapy. But they function at different levels. The
counselling psychologist is almost always concerned with normal individuals who
experience conflicts of different degrees of complexity, experience anxiety, are
unable to decide and are subject to spells of vacillation. Indecision in matters of
conflict-resolution or choice of goals or paths of action is painful. The psychiatrist
and the clinical psychologist are concerned with pathological cases involving serious
emotional disturbances.
The importance of counselling in modem times cannot be overemphasized. It
can become almost mdispensable owing to such factors as rapid industrialization,increased knowledge, population explosion, urbanization, economic upheavals,
technological innovations, ecological imbalances, excessive competition, impersonal
bureaucracy, rapid rate of consumption of resources, impending threat of an atomic
holocaust, etc.


--- PAGE 61 ---
Counselling and Related Fields 41
COUNSELLING AS A HELPING RELATIONSHIP
(Counselling is in its essence a 'helping relationship*. AH of us seek to satisfy our
personal needs. More often than not, in trying to gratify our needs, we find ourselves
in conflicting situations in which our interests clash with those of oth^. But
through the process of socialization in childhood, and later through education, we
learn to moderate our desires such that there is no open clash. We may learn to
suppress a few desires and inhibit other needs so long as our happiness is not
endangered. In addition to human suffering caused by physical handicaps and clash
of interests, a major source of suffering is to be found in one's own personality.
Often a sense of personal inadequacy and inferiority leads to lack of self-conHdence,
withdrawal and lack of desire for achievement Even if the individual has the desire
or motivation, he is hindered by subjective and environmental factors. The
psychological conflicts, namely those of goals, values, interests and the like, cause
an ebbing of human enthusiasm and zest for life. The counselling psychologist
alleviates this suffering by establishing a helping relationship. In the words of
Rogers, a helping relationship is one "in which one of the participants intends that
there should come about, in one or both parties, more appreciation of, more
expression of, more functional use of the latent inner resoiuces of the individual".
The commonly observed relationships such as those between the teacher and pupil,
husband and wife, mother and child, counsellor and counsellee, could all be
considered helping relationships.
A helping relationship is characterized by certain essential features. According
to Shertzer and Stone (1968), the helping relationship:
1. Is meaningful because it is personal and intimate.
2. Is affective in nature involving mild to strong emotional relationships.
3. Involves the integrity of the helper and the helped and is sustained voluntarily.
4. Involves the mutual consent of the counsellor and the counsellee either
explicitly stated or implicitly to be inferred.
5. Takes place because the individual in need of help is aware of his own
limitations and inadequacies.
6. Involves confidence reposed in the helper.
7. Is often achieved and maintained through communication and interaction; it
ihvolves give and take, that is, it is not a one-way process.
8. Involves a certain amount of 'structure'. The situation is either vaguely or
clearly defined.
9. Is marked by the desire for change in the existing condition of the client,
that is, it is concerned with the improvement of the client.
While most human relationships may involve the rendering or receiving of
help, over the years, importance has come to be attached to providing help
effectively and efficiently. In other words, helping has become professional
in nature. According to McCully (1966), "a helping profession is defined as
one which, based upon its specialized knowledge, applies an intellectual
technique to the existential affairs of others toward the end of enabling them to
cope more effectively with the dilemmas and paradoxes that characterize the human


--- PAGE 62 ---
4Z CounseUIngand Guidance
condition."*® In short a helping profession involves^pecialized knowledge, trained
skills and the desire to provide comfort to others^)
COUNSELLING AS A SOLUTION TO HUMAN PROBLEMS
Counselling aims at helping the clients understand and accept themselves "as they
-are", such that they are able to work towards realizing their potential. Often this
requires modification of attitudes, outlook and behaviour. The nature of the
counselling process depends on the setting or the situation. The counsellor accepts
his clients and has unconditional regard for their personality or self or self-worth;
Naturally, counselling involves the feelings of clients. It is often because the feelings
run strong that the counselling function becomes a highly delicate and specialized
function. In addition to the concern for the feelings of the clients, counselling has
a cognitive dimension through which a behavioural change (conation) is sought to
be achieved. The client is received without any reservations and he is helped to
state his problems and explore the possible solutions. The counsellor does not try
to solve the client's problems or make choices that could reduce his emotional
conflicts. Instead, through counselling, the client is helped to discover for himself
his strengths and weaknesses. The self-understanding that is sought to be reached
is often through the use of objective psychological instruments. It is generally
recognized that an individual has the ability to resolve one's own problems. What
is supposed to prevent the individual from making suitable choices is a lack of
proper or adequate self-understanding and understanding of the environment The
counsellor aims at making the client act independently in a mature and responsible
manner and with full understanding of the consequences. This is what is meant by
personality development, A child or an adolescent is not able to act independently-
He is not prepared to face the consequences of his actions. Hence, he is considered
immature. A mature person, on the other hand, is expected to function efficiently,
make desirable adjustments when he has the necessary understanding of his capacities
and liabilities as well as the environmental conditions—physical, social and cultural-—
in tCTms of which he has to act. Counselling aims at helping individuals reach a
stage or state of self-autonomy through self-understanding, self-direction and self-
motivation. Such an individual suffers from the minimum of inhibitions, conflicts
and anxieties. He is a 'fully-functioning person'N
'®C.H. McQilly, "The Counsellor—histrument of change", Teachers College Record, 1965; t'J*;66, pp. 405-412. '■ ^


--- PAGE 63 ---
jr /yi) u u irfn) o
o
Common Concoms sind
o
INTRODUCTION
Most human problems arise from life situations and significantly affect the
development of individuals. From the psychoanalytic point of view, problems of
adjustment are explained to be the result of the nature of the psycho-sexual
development of the individual. According to this view, complexes arise when
the libido is blocked or fixated or even tarried at any particular stage. Such
fixations in unfavourable circumstances may precipitate personality problems
and lead to problems of adjustment While the psychoanalytic position of Freud
deserves attention for its clinical insights, there are other points of view which try
to explain the reasons for adjustmental problems with or without employing Freudian
concepts.
DEVELOPMENTAL TASKS
Havighurst (1953) explains that individuals must acquire certain competencies and
skills as they grow from infancy to adulthood. He calls these competencies
•developmental tasks', which he defines as the tasks which arise at or about certain
periods in the life of the individual in relation to his environment. A successful
achievement of the tasks contributes to the individual's happiness and also to his
success in dealing with later tasks, while failure could cause unhappiness and result
in social disapproval as well as difficulty in the performance of later tasks. '
Developmental tasks, like biological growth, follow a pattern and are hierarchictoy
related. They are determined by biological, physiological and cultural factors We
expect a child of two years, for example, to walk without help. If the child c^not
walk, he cannot perform the developmental task which is expected to be mastered
by the age of two years. The chUd is considered to have a problem and this may


--- PAGE 64 ---
44 Counsellingand Guidance
interfere with the acquisition of other motor skills. It could adversely affect the
development of the child's personality. The ability to walk is biologically determined.
It results from the maturational process. In Samoa, for example, children at the age
of Hve or six are expected to be able to swim well and they actually do so. In the
Indian society the acquisition of this skill is not considered important at such an
early age and hence is almost absent at this age. This skill, therefore, is culturally
determined. Certain other tasks are psychologically determined. For example, an
individual is expected to evince interest and exhibit concern in achieving a masculine
or feminine role as the case may be, striving to find self-identity, accepting one's
physique and using the body effectively, etc. If a little boy were to exhibit a mature
sex interest we would consider it an aberration, while if an adult failed to show this
interest, he would be considered to have a psychological or psycho-psysiological
problem.
ADOLESCENCE
Development in the early stages is determined by inborn forces (inherited factors)
and reflects what human beings have in common with animals. However, the later
stages of development raise human beings above animals and make them distinctively
human. For Hall, the vague evolutionary principle of recapitulation governed the
unfolding of the human life cycle. For Freud 'sexuality' was the guiding force in
life and the ultimate source of all energy. This later stage of development, Hall
holds, corresponds to the stage of adolescence. It is during this stage that the
individual becomes aware of most of the forces or institutions that shape his adult
life. For Hall, adolescence was a particularly vital period in perpetuating nature's
evolutionary scheme for mankind. Adolescence has a kind of dual significance. On
the one hand, it represents the 'recapitulative' stage—the bridge between the primitive
and the civilized. On the other hand, it is a period during which the individual
becomes more sensitive to the cultural atmosphere that surrounds him. This increased
sensitivity, awareness and flexibility marte a kind of second birth. He would,
during this time, contribute to changing and promoting the institutions. Adolescence
sustains the society in its march towards progress. A hundred years before Hall,
Rousseau described adolescence as a kind of rebirth. It was described as a period
of great complexity that marks a vital stage in human development. This stage has
a particularly decisive impact on adult personality. Hall described this period as one
of 'storm and stress' (strum und rfrong). The imperiousness of adolescent sexuality
is responsible for making adolescence a period of emotional turbulence and
instability. There is increased reactivity and the normal adolescent is susceptible to
abrupt shifts in mood—high spirits at one moment and depths of despair in the
next This tendency to extreme and unpredictable behaviour presents society with
one of its greatest challenges. Hall's characterization of adolescence as a period of
storm and stress corresponds to the commonly held view of the teenage. He
emphasized the importance of adolescence as a period of development, during
which various elements of personality get integrated, resulting in the emergence of
a sense of individuality.


--- PAGE 65 ---
Developmental Characteristics ofYouth 45
Anna Freud describes adolescence as an exclusively egoistic stage. However, in
later life adolescents are capable of forming the most passionate love relations, self-
sacrifice and devotion. They are materialistic and selfish and at the same time, full
of lofty idealism. The growing individual cannot remain forever in the complicated
emotional tangle he had got himself into. The ambivalences have to be sorted out
and removed from the path of development. While relegating adolescence to a
lesser role, Anna Freud was broadly in agreement with Hall's portrayal of adolescence
as a period of emotional turbulence.Tt is a stage during which both the desirable
and the undesirable, that is the good and the bad aspects of human nature often tend
to be simultaneously revealed. The later neo-psychoanalytic theories, while not
accepting the emphasis attached to sexuality, also neglected the role of social and
cultural factors in affecting the course of human development.
Sullivan stressed the importance of the satisfaction of two inter-personal needs—
the need for security and the need for emotional support. These needs exist co-
terminously with life. Psychoanalytic tenets stress the immutability of the 'id' and
the mutability of the 'ego*. In other words, they hold that the basic human drives
change very little throughout life. Only the ability to handle them changes. Thus
the psychoanalytic theories view the human existence as an inner struggle between
the 'id' and the 'ego' under the watchful eye of an overseeing 'super-ego'.
Irrespective of the level of civilization that human beings may have achieved, there
is an inherent primitive tendency in them, craving for release. This reductionist's
account of personality development is the basic theme of the constant threat of the
'return of the repressed'. However, Sullivan views human development less as an
internal struggle and more as an attainment of certain crucial relationships with
other people, that is, securing certain 'inter-personal needs'. According to Sullivan,
what begins in infancy as a global, vague and diffused need for security, is
progressively refined to be fulfilled by one's close friends. What was once amorphous
and uncritical has bwome increasingly differentiated and selective. This explanation
of human development emphasizes significantly, inter-personal needs rather than
'libido' as a driving force in life. The motivating principle of human behaviour
involves the concept of tension reduction, which is similar to the psychoanalytic
explanation. Certain needs arise within the individual, which impel him to engage
in various activities for obtaining some gratification and relief. Sullivan holds that
it is the need to be free of anxiety that provides a key to all human motivation.
Classical psychoanalysis also stresses the importance of anxiety which, of course,
is caused by the 'id' impulses. They are the prime movers, although it is apparently
anxiety that appears to have caused the activity or behaviour. Hall, Anna Freud and
Sullivan regard adolescence as a period of turmoil, although the emphasis varies.
Heinz Hartmann stressed that the human infant is more than a bundle of drives
at birth and is bom with inborn capacities or 'ego apparatuses'. Therefore, even at
birth the human infant is made to respond, however primitively, to changes in his
environment. In other words, the human infant is born pre-adapted to the
environment. Radical shifts in his surroundings and inconsistent handling should
make it difficult for the child's adaptive skills to develop normally. Erickson was
deeply influenced by Hartmann, though his orientation was basically psychoanalytic.
Erickson s theory contains all the basic elements of the theories of Hall, Anna


--- PAGE 66 ---
46 Counsellingand Guidance
fteud and Sullivan. He portrays adolescence as a pivotal period in personality
development and provides an alternate solution to the 'storm and stress' phenomenwi
and presents an inclusive conceptual theory, explaining the many facts of adolescent
development, both normal and abnormal. If we describe psychoanalytic theory as
'mechanistic', Erickson's theory may appropriately be called 'organic'. In
psychoanalytic theory, there was too much ^phasis on the pathological and
defensive aspects of human nature, while ad^tive and creative aspects of human
nature have not been given due importance. Erickson explains that personality
results from the continuous interaction of the three great systems—the biological,
social, and individual—and these systems are inseparable and mutually
interdependent
Erickson agrees with psychoanalysis that at birth the human infant is invested
with a powerful set of drives and impulses. He is in agreement with Hanmann who
holds that the infant is bom pre>adapted to an 'average expectable environment*.
To this basic description, he adds the need for continuity of experience. He explains
that human development occurs in a more or less predictable sequence and that it
is governed to some extent by innate mechanism or maturational factors. This sort
of mechanism underlies all organic development—human and animal. The epigenetic
principle implies that anything that grows has a ground plan and out of this, parts
arise, each part having its time of special ascendency, until all the parts have arisen
to a form of functioning whole. (1968 p. 92). But the unfoldmeni cannot take place
in a vacuum. At least in the case of human beings who are bom with a physical
state of great helplessness and dependency, the biological dimension by itself cannot
achieve anything without the social dimension. The infant's drives cannot be satisfied,
his sense of order and consistency cannot be maintained and sustained, his peculiar
potentialities cannot become manifest, in the absence of other people who serveto stimulate, nurture, sustain and reward them. If he is to survive, he has to be
cared for. Development of potentialities involves social interaction. The child has
to toake several adjustments to the rest of the family if he has to grow into a
civilized humM being just as he has to leam about his own demands and theirs.
This social dimension in personality development involves a series of mutual
accommodations.
"Hie precise nature of accommodations varies from culture to culture. There are
obvious outer limits which are determined by the infant's needs and vulnerabilities.
He cannot be starved and cannot be severely abused. Between these outer limits,
each family is permitted to adapt its modes of treatment, popularly called child-
reanng practices and styles which not only differ from one culture to another,
but also from one family to another. This explains why no two persons ever
develop into identical personalities, though all are bdm with a need to categorize
and organize experience. No two persons are bom with precisely the same equipment
(physical, social and cultural). Each individual will perceive and respond to the
situation and the world differently. Consequently, even identictd twins do not have
precisely the same experiences and no two persons can integrate those experiences
precisely in the same way. This underlies the importance of the individual or
'ego-element' in personality development-in addition to biological and social
dimensions.


--- PAGE 67 ---
Developmental Characteristics of Youth 47
The proper co-ordination of biological, social and individual factors will help
develop a healthy person, who actively masters the environment and shows uniQ'
of personality, and is able to perceive the world and himself correctly. These three
systems are inseparable and are responsible for the development of the concept of
identity. A healthy individual develops the capacity to place himself in an ego-
space-time experience. This is responsible for the individual's recognition of himself
as a unique person with a particular past, present and future, within a specific
society. Those who can integrate their experiences are unified and those who cannot
are not. If the breakdown in ego synthesis is serious enough, individuals can
become severely disorganized. The development of a sense of identity is essential
to human evolution. As civilization advanced, each tribe and community conceived
of itself as being unique in order to make sense of all the differences that had
emerged in habit, custom and appearance. What is true of a group is true of the
individual; thus each develops the need to feel special or unique within the group.
Erickson's explanations of 'identiQ^* are somewhat unclear, a little vague and even
ambiguous. Howev^, we can understand the sense of 'identity' in its 'psychological
perspective' to include:
1. A conscious sense of individual uniqueness
2. An unconscious striving for continuity of experience
3. A solidarity with group ideals (Erickson, 1968, p. 208).
Identity, like personality development, has a biological, a social and an individual
or ego dimension. This helps us understand how a person manages to construct an
identity, how each individual has a need to feel ^)ecial, perhaps arising out of the
'unconscious striving for continuity of experience'. But this cannot happen in the
absence of a culture, for culture provides the care and consistency necessary for the
development of ego and formation of identity which is not only vital but central to
the ego-space-time experience.
All human existence revolves around the need to maintain a certain 'equilibrium'.
Erickson stresses the importance of 'continuity of experience' as a critical variable
in personality development. He describes the challenge of development as 'normative
crisis' or 'nuclear conflicts' and had identified eight such crises or challenges that
need to be resolved between the period of birth and death. No one, however, can
successfully and completely gratify or resolve these challenges and hence no one
is free from anxiety. Conflicts remain unresolved and each leaves a mark upon the
individual and upon society. Every human being, even as a child, seeks to formulate
a sense of self, or of the kind of person he is, and to obtain relief from an 'uncanny
feeling of dread' that the human being is beset with soon after birth. Tlie impressions
the child forms both of the world and of himself may be found to be considerably
at variance with those of others, once he interacts with adults other than his parents
and with other children.
Personality development is a process that continues from infancy to old age.
Erickson desigriates adolescence as a particularly crucial period for identity formation.
What happens in adolescence is of course, in many ways determined by what went
before, but that in turn determines much that follows. Thus adolescence occupies
a pivotal position. Adolescents differ from children in that they act and look more
like adults but they are not adults and are not treated as such. This discrepancy is


--- PAGE 68 ---
48 CounselHr^and Guidance
tied up with sexual development. The adolescent is described as beginning
progressively to-experience a sense of alienation from parents and other adults.
Sp.Tiifll conflicts and turmoil are only a part of the portrait of adolescence, as seen
in expressions such as 'adolescent rebellion*, 'gen^tion gap', and so on.
As the child grows and reaches puberty a psychological metamorphosis takes
place. Volumes have been written about adolescence. It is a fascinating area of
research for the psychologist Adolescence is a developmental period during which
a growing pason makes a transition from childhood to adulthood. It is a lime of
striking change and is considered a unique period. It creates problems for the
individuals themselves, besides being a source of perplexity and irritation to adults.
In most cultures this period has been institutionalize into one of several years*
duration during which individuals are no longer viewed as children but nonetheless
are considered to be too immature to be treated as adults. In this period youth are
expected to attain physical, mental and emotional maturity. They are required to
make serious efforts to assume vocational and civic responsibilities. The most
remarkable characteristic of adolescence is change. The change is physiological,
psychological and sociological. The sociological significance of adolescent
charactCTistics is of considerable importance. The biological development of human
beings is always paralleled by sociological development Changes in social attitudes
parallel changes in physiological stnictare.
Most wiitos have described adolescence as a period of storm and stress. However,
Margaret Mead's (1949, 1953) studies of Samoan youth have demonstrated that
adolescence is not by nature necessarily a period of turmoil and stress. The social
considerations determining patterns of thou^t and behaviour in the western societiesne^ not necessarily hold good in other societies in which the transition from
chilt^ood to adulthood is smooth and passes off without being recognized as a
special period. Studies of non-westem cultures by sociologists and cultural
anthropologists have given credende to the view that adolescence is a 'cultural
invention'.
Adolescence is a rather trying period, during which the fulfilment of adult desires
IS Relayed. Adult members do not accept adolescents as men and women and often
believe that they have to be directed and commanded. Yet the youth are expected
to have developed new interests and a new sense of personality. At one moment
the adolescent is treated as an adult and expected to act like one. At the next
moment he may be forced to act like a child. Thus in modem societies there is an
implicit conflict between the attitudes, values and ideologies of adults and
adolescents. The adolescents naturally experience much difficulty in defining their
roles. Uncertainty regarding their roles creates ambiguity in their motivations which
in its turn leads to emotional instability. The basic nature of the society within
which they find themselves causes many conflicts. What the youth learn from
books and from adults about what is desirable and good and what should be
accomplished is full of contradictions. One is told as a boy that 'honesQ^ is the best
policy", "truth is virtue", and so on. But he finds himself surrounded by adults who
often pay scant respect to what they profess and preach. Some of the adult practices
are diametrically opposed to what adults profess to be correct Adolescents exposed
to such conflicting experiences become estranged and alienated from their society.


--- PAGE 69 ---
Developmental Characteristics ofYouth 49
During this period there is a significant growth of self-awareness in the
adolescents. This involves the thinking of such questions as who he is and what sort
of a person he is, and he is very much aware of himself. Often he experiences
agonies of self-consciousness as he grapples with, and attempts to come to terms
with new values and ideologies.
The most important aspect of adolescents' adjustment concerns their emotional
problems. The impact of adolescence varies from individual to individual, family
to family, culture to culture, country to country, generation to generation (Honrocks,
1976).
It is necessary to bear in mind that there are bound to be individual variations.
The important points of difference could be when:
1. The adolescent becomes increasingly aware of himself and strives to test the
conception of himself against reality. Consequently he learns to fit into
personal and social roles which suit his self-concept as well as his concept
of others.
2. The adolescent seeks status as an individual, he resents parental authori^
and the close supervision of his activities by parents. In most cases
adolescence is a period of emerging vocational interests and striving for
economic independence.
3. The adolescent seeks status and recognition from his age-mates. He also
strives to conform to the standards of his peers.
4. The adolescent finds himself confronted with an emerging heterosexual
interest and frequently this may cause emotional conflicts.
5. Adolescence is important as a period in the development and evaluation of
the individual's value-system. These determine the central values which
serve to integrate his life. The adolescent has ideals which may conflict with
reality. Therefore, it is frequently said that adolescence is a period of conflict
between immature idealism and reality.
These points indicate the areas in which there is an anxiety-producing
developmental process. Sometimes adolescents may exhibit alienation which is a
syndrome comprising attitudes of ego-centricity, distrust, pessimism, anxiety,
meaninglessness, powerlessness and normlessness. Often this results in a state of
estrangement between the self and the objective world. The individual who feels
alienated also feels lonely, unwanted, uncared for and unvalued. The feeling of
alienation during adolescence may be a transitory phenomenon and represents a
normative condition. It could assume, under exceptional conditions, deviant patterns
of behaviour. Some psychologists consider alienation as an inevitable and necessary
state experienced by all individuals passing through adolescence. It is resolved
satisfactorily before adulthood is reached but it could cause misery and agony to
the adolescents.
Adolescence can also be marked by inter-generation conflicts arising from the
generation gap. The causes for inter-generation conflicts are legion. The most
significant among them are the incorrect perceptions that adolescents and adults
have of each other. This situation is exacerbated by the lack of adequate and proper
communication between them. These and such other factors cause much anxiety


--- PAGE 70 ---
50 Counselling and Guidance
and tension which could be leduced, if not eliminated, by providing suitable
assistance.
Another important aspect of the adolescent's personality is his conception of
self, which, by its very nature, is the least tangible. Nevertheless, it is necessary and
has a central place in the individual's personality. Adolescence marks a vital stage
in the development of the self-concept of an individual. Several adolescents
experience difficult in developing an integrated self-concept which is consistent
and is able to stand the test of reality. Self-concept is not present at birth and
evolves essentially through learning which in actuality consists of the individual's
conception of his several identities. The self-concept slowly develops, following
the inception of ability to think symbolically. The self-concept which develops
during adolescence becomes stable in later years.
ERICKSON'S THEORY OF PSYCHOLOGICAL DEVELOPMENT
Along with the psycho-sexual development as explmned by Freud, are corresponding
psycho-social stages of ego-development as adumbrated by Erickson (1950).
Following the psychoanalytical model, Erickson has outlined a sequence of psycho-
social development in which each preceding stage of development is a preparatory
phase for the subsequent one. Erickson's theory stresses the epigenic principle. .
According to this, the development of new properties which were not contained in
the original situation develop as a result of environmental influences and the
interaction between the former (original situation) and the latter (environmental
factors). Thus at each stage of development the individual encounters new situations
to which he may or may not be ready to adjust himself, depending on whether he
has an appropriate plan to enable him to find his identity. Sometimes the situation
that he encounters may lead to a crisis owing to its own problems and conflicts.
Erickson emphasizes the problems unique to adolescents and adults and has
contributed towards rectifying the one-sided explanations concerning childhood as
the prime source of all adjustmental problems as described by Freudian
psychoanalyas. He argues that personality development does not stop at adolescence,but continues throughout the life of the individual.
Ego QMalities
Erickson explains that the individual has ego qualities which emerge dunng thecritical periods of his development
The first age of an individual is characterized by a'normauve
conflict between trust and mistrust according to Erickson.
first ego quality. This conflict is an interpersonal one asperiod, Wancy'^U.ecluldhastobegiven so™
and dependency, that his needs wiU ^ ^ ratify his needs, the
S'^^oLpircoStTt ^d prompt indulgence help the infant overcome early


--- PAGE 71 ---
I
feelings of mistrust. In early childhood, the individual learns to count or not to
count on other people. His interactions provide, aileast in part, the basis for his
identity. This basic trust versus mistrust is the first of the ego qualities. By 'basic'
is meant that it is not essentially conscious but is an underlying feeling of which
the individual has a vague sense. Trust implies that one leams to ^pect a certain
behaviour from others which is consistent. When this ego quality is not well
developed, the individual has a sense of mistrust and is wary of trusting others and
anticipates unpleasantness in his dealings with others. Infants never quite resolve
the conflict between trust and mistrust, neither do adults. The need to trust in a
higher power (God) is generally found among adults. The sense of trust underlies
the virtue of faith in adults.
The second ego quality is autonomy versus shame and doubt. Erickson's expla
nation of this stage combines psychoanalytic, interpersonal and anthropological
elements. Having progressed beyond the passive receptiveness of the first stage, the
child is concerned with 'holding on' and letting go* in general. The child has
advanced considerably by this stage, but is still highly dependent and wants to
assert himself. Almost inevitably he finds himself at odds with his parents. Through
interaction with them the child can hope to achieve a successful equilibrium between
autonomy and self-doubt This stage has a lasting impact both on society and
human nature. It is at this stage that the individual's autonomous will and his desire
to do things his way become apparent Erickson traces the origin of will or 'will
power' in adulthood to this stage. It is also at this stage that 'control' and 'regulations*
first enter the picture and a parallel can be drawn between parent-child conflict and
the institutions of law and-order.
As the child grows he progressively becomes self-dependent and experiences a
sense of autonomy. When he fails to experience a sense of autonomy, he feels a
sense of shame. This stage of development is a decisive one in the development of
love, cooperation, willingness and freedom of self-expression. A thwarting of this
quality leads to hate, non-cooperaticm, unwillingness and suppression of self-
expression.
The third ego quality is initiative versus guilt. A child who experiences autonomy
is able to take initiative. An individual who has not experienced autonomy may
develop a sense of guilt Around the age of four to five years, a child is able to use
his locomotory organs and move about freely to explore his immediate environment.
Simultaneously he leams to speak. Using locomotion and language, he expands his
imagination. This stage plays a crucial part in the development of his conscience.
The fourth ego quality is industry versus inferiority. This fourth phase differs
from the preceding three in that it is not a swing from an 'inner upheaval to a new
mastery*. This stage encompasses the child's elementary school years and emphasizes
the impact that education can have during thes6 years. In all cultures, the
channelization and direction of a child's energies form an important part at this
stage. The problem of channelling human energies originates in childhood but
continues to remain a vital issue for adults and every culture must lay down certain
guidelines for productive adult activity. Children must begin to feel and adults
should retain the feeling that the actions serve some purpose. The child acquires the
skills needed to work within his particular society. Learning these skills requires


--- PAGE 72 ---
52 Counsellingand Guidance
some discipline. Consequenily, this stage involves transformation of the sense of
initimive into a sense of industry. The child's sense of industry always competes
with a sense of inferiority. Therefore, some guidance, gentle and unobtrusive, is
necessary. The trend towards 'sensitiveness' may not only lead to no learning but
also to ideas of procrastination and evasion of responsibili^. If a balance is struck
between industry and inferiority the child emerges from this stage with his self-
esteem intact and a sense of industry, which develops into competence. The child
learns about the kinds of work his society considers valuable and he develops ideas
of fitting himself harmoniously into the occupational hierarchy.
The growing child is explorative and manipulates his environment. He tries to
change and adapt to his environmenL In his desire to be a constructive person he
believes that he can do several things and he actually tries to carry out his plans.
Failure in this expectation results in feelings of inferiority. Success prods him on
to -further work and makes him industrious.
The fifth ego quality is identity versus role diffiision. This stage corresponds to
the adolescent years and is a critical period in the personality development of the
individual. Since the individual ego has been set upon a certain course during the
previous four stages, the events of this period are partially determined, i.e. they
must in some sense follow the course the ego has so far followed. The child has
continued to nurture and assimilate the customs and values of his culture and in the
process he has begun to formulate an identity. This complex process of identity
formation, is a continuous series of back-and-forth manoeuvres.
Adolescence is a crucial period for identity-formation and depends on the
capacities of the adolescent age. For this one must be able to entertain a number
of different alternatives. One must be able to examine one's existence from a
-historical perspective, evaluating the sort of Individual one is at present and the sort
of person one can become in future. The adolescent, besides possessing the necessary
skills to decide upon an identity, is also faced with certain pressures to do so. He
can build upon the identification of the past in this endeavour of the feelings of
trust, autonomy, initiative and industry that have hopefully resulted from his attempts
to cope with other normative crises. He must look ahead to the conflicts of adulthood
as well as develop his own strategies for meeting them in the midst of so many
things around him at once or simultaneously. Since the adolescent must take many
decisions about himself not merely on the basis of what he has become but also
upon his best assumption of what he is likely to become, there is considerable
potential for indecision. Erickson, therefore, describes this core conflict Of
adolescence as 'idendty versus diffusion (confusion)'.
According to Erickson, the core conflict of adolescents is idenliQ' versus identity-
diffusion and several other adolescent conflicts could be subsumed under it. As
puberty approaches, there is a certain amount of confusion in an individual regarding
his own role and that of the expectations of others. Aidtudes towards people and
actions change. The adolescent who is able to successfully resolve his idendty
crisis re-groups his childhood identificadons and tests a new idendty in which he
has confidence. Adolescents who are unsuccessful in the resolution of this identity
crisis become ego-diffused. There is a kind of role differendadon which one has to
learn as one grows—because one is a boy/girl, one does or does not do certain


--- PAGE 73 ---
Developmental Characteristics of YouOi 53
kinds of things. The roles are not clear and well defined. There is an enormous
amount of role confusion and role diffusion, that is, there is inabiliQ' to decide
about the kind of person one wants or desires to be. Either because of social
circumstances or family upbringing the youth may fail to attain a sense of personal
identic and a desirable concept of one's self. This could lead to a sense of not
being able to know 'what one is' or 'where one belongs' or' to whom one belongs'.
Such confusion could lead to delinquencies. A few seek 'negative identity', that is,
one which is contradictory to the expected or socially approved norm. But this
should not be construed as a 'lost' case. Adolescents who fail to establish a clear
sense of personal identic could improve with sympathetic assistance.
One who has attained a 'working sense of ego-identity' cannot aHbrd to be
complacent One will of necessity encounter challenges and threats to this identic
in future siuiations, for the solving of problems at one stage is no guarantee against
the cropping up of new problems which could jeopardize one's adjustment
The sixth ego quality is intimacy versus isolation. Erickson considers social
interaction as an unavoidable and fundamental influence on personally development
He believes that a stiu-dy self image is necessary and it helps develop intimate
relations. Identity is the prerequisite of all interpersonal relationships. Successful
young persons must be able to express warmth and affection for others and they
must be able to distinguish friends from enemies. One must be secure about oneself
to endure and even enjoy being by oneself. The major.preoccupations of adulthood,
love and work, require a balance between these two trends. A normal person has
to love and work (lieben und arbeiten) to be a balanced healthy individual. The
individual who fears closeness may withdraw from others and use his work as a
protective shield. But the person who cannot bear to be alone, who can never shut
out others, can never work. This 'age of man' with his emphasis on love and
productivity is characterized by a broadening of social horizons. In early adulthood,
the individual has critically moved beyond the confines of the parental home into
a larger and more variegated community. In the young adult this new sense of
participation encourages a fellow-feeling and solidarity that did not exist before.
A successful search for identiy leads to a willingness to seek and obtain satisfying
companionship. The individual is ready to commit himself to affiliations or
partnerships. An avoidance of this leads to the painful state of isolation and self-
absorption. This stage is arrived at in adulthood in the life-stage development of the
individual. The human life process is not only one of growth and development, but
also of assimilation and accommodation, leading to a progressive differentiation of
functions and roles which, in course of further development, are synthesized or
integrated into mature roles and personal identities. The growing person seeks to
find his identity which determines the feeling of acceptance of self and a sense of
integrity and belonging. A lack of sense of identiy could lead to feelings of distress.
The life sequence of individuals includes two important periods in which negativism
could be a major tendency of expression. One of these appears early in childhood
and the other later in adolescence. Negativism may result from the blocking of the
mastery motive by the environmental factors. It may also arise from the difficulty
encountered by the individual in testing reality in terms of his feelings of self-
identity. During adolescence one has to deal with self-esteem in terms of which


--- PAGE 74 ---
54 Counsellingand Guidance
one's choices, self-evaluation and self-perceptions are made. Self-attitudes of
individuals differ in content, direction, importance, consistency, stability and clarity.
The adolescent judges and classifies himself on the basis of these self-attitudes.
Generally the self-attitudes are favourable but when they become negativistic they
have seriotis consequences. They determine not only how the individual will react
in any given situation but also how he will be reacted to. In considering self-
esteem, it is necessary to distinguish between self-evaluation and self-worth. The
latter is more fundamental than the former as it is more intra-situational.
The seventh ego quality is generativity versus stagnation. Generativity incorpo
rates productivity and creativity. The individual is concerned with his offspring and
also with altruistic actions. Regression from generativity often leads to pseudo-
intimacy and to the impoverishment of relationships. The consequence of this may
not be desirable and the individual is either able to experience or miss the most
creative part of his life.
An adolescent's world is more complicated than that of a child as it has many
more possibilities and alternatives to sift through. Role experimentation during
adolescence helps him discover where his true talents and tastes lie. One of the
most important choices to be weighed and tested during adolescence has to do with
work—the concern is to produce something worthwhile. Occupations chosen
constitute a rather critical element in the youngster's emerging identity. Stagnation
is the negative counterpart to generativity. It is the fear of stagnation that helps
keep people productive. Generativity is itself a driving power in human organization.
The last but equally important ego quality is integrity versus despair. This state
is characterized by belief and faith in onself. Having successfully established identity
and intimacy, the individual experiences a sense of fulfilment.
A number of apparendy maladjustive reaction patterns are described by Erickson
in the role diffusion that accompanies identity crises, including labile and
unpredictable b^aviour, lack of commitment, deviant behaviour, and so on that are
indicative of psychopathology when they occur in adults but are near-normal in
healthy adolescence.
According to Erickson, one of the paramount needs of human existence is to
Hnd meaning and continuity in experience. This is most evident in the eighth and
final stage of man. In most cultures in which work and self-sufficiency are valued,
this final stage is challenging and often brings images of despair to mind. If a
person can believe that he has met the crises of the previous stages with good grace
and reasonable success, and that he has found a unique and worthwhile destiny for
himself, a sense of integrity may predominate. A grown-up individual who has
taken care of things and people and has adapted himself to success and
disappointments with equanimity finds the seven stages maturing to integrity. This
stage is the acceptance of 'oneself as one is, and does not need to seek any
institutional help for adjustment It is the acceptance of one's life as one's own
responsibility.
Erickson designates wisdom as the enduring human virtue of the final stages of
human life. His persistent theme is that human nature, social institutions and the
survival of the human race are all mutually interdependent From the various stages
of life, such dispositions of faith, will power, purposefulness, competence, fidelity.


--- PAGE 75 ---
Developmental Characteristics ofYouth 55
love, care, wisdom—all characteristics of the individual strength—flow into the life
of institutions. Without these, social institutions falter.
Development of Personality
Erickson explains that each stage has a positive as well as a negative aspect. If the
ego qualities in the preceding stages have been negative the final stage may be one
of despair. This life cycle outlined by Erickson represents a normative sequence of
psychological growth corresponding to physiological growth and maturation. There
is much similarity between Havighurst's and Erickson's explanations of the
development of human personality.
Zaccaria (1965) identifies a number of concepts with which Havighurst, Erickson
and Super are in broad agreement. They are:
1. Individual growth is a continuous process.
2. This process could be conveniently divided into periods or life-stages.
3. Each life stage is characterized by certain general characteristics which
individuals have in common.
4. In a given culture most individuals pass through similar developmental
stages.
5. The society imposes responsibilities and makes certain demands on the
individual during these stages.
6. The demands of the society are uniform for all its members.
7. The demands differ form one stage to another as the individual progresses
through the developmental process.
8. Developmental crisis occurs when individuals fail to perceive the need to
adjust to different situations.
9. Through successfully meeting the developmental crises the individual moves
from one stage of maturity to the next, that is, a given tasks must be
mastered and the crises overcome before he can successfully move from
one developed stage to the other.
10. The developmental task appears explicitly at its corresponding stage.
11. The preparation for meeting the developmental crises or tasks occurs in the
preceding life stage.
12. The developmental crisis may arise during a later phase in the life of the
individual in a somewhat different form.
13. Meeting a crisis successfully leads to social approval and happiness.
14. Failure to meet the task lea^ to disapproval and unhappiness.^^
In early infancy there is an amorphous and undifferentiated feeling which slowly
gets differentiated and is expressed and responded to individually. With maturity,
development and a wider range of emotional experiences there is a further
differentiation of these feelings. One of the important problems in early and late
childhood is differentiadon versus non-differentiation when the child fails to control
^ J.S. Zaccaria, "Developmenlal tasks: Implications for the goals of guidance". Personnel
and Guidance Journal, 1965,44, pp. 372-375.


--- PAGE 76 ---
56 Counselling and Guidance
and differentiate feelings as a part of development towards maturity. The failure to
leam to express certain feelings In accordance with the accepted norms and to
control the expression of certain other feelings would comprise serious problems of
development and behaviour. Such failures may result from adult ambivalence. If
ambivalent experiences are repeated often enough, the child may become anxious.
Another mechanism of adjustment concerns 'acting out*. Children leam to act in
certain ways, for example, crying loudly or exhibiting temper-tantrums because
they know by experience that by resorting to this method their needs are satisfied.
This pattern of ^haviour, when repeated often, becomes set. As children grow,
these sets orpauems of behaviour are slowly modified. Education plays an important
role in this by making children slowly give up irrational ways in preference to
rational modes of thinking, feeling and behaving. The family and cultural factors
of course play a crucial role apart from the individual's own experiences. Often
distortions are noticed in the expression of feelings and impulses. A common
example of such distortion is the expression of anger. An individual learns that
unrestrained expression of anger is destmctive and, therefore, can be indulged in
only at one's own peril. When actually confronted with a situation one may resort
to substitute mechanisms—some desirable and others undesirable.
SOaO-CULTURAL FACTORS
The essential nature of human life is its incompleteness and this is a blessing. If
it were otherwise, there would be very little room or scope for change and without
change th«e would be no progress. Growing up is a process in which one gives
as well as receives. One learns to do things for others in order to get affection, to
gratify one's needs, to be secure, etc. In this context, it would be helpful to view
counselling as a special type of assistance provided for the progress of the
developmental process and for advice on changes a client needs by which he can
become a 'fully-functioning person*.
The nature of the developmental process, outlined above, often creates problems
for the adolescents. It is the responsibility of adults to help solve them. Modem
youth lives in an unenviable situation. Proficiency in different kinds of skills,
mature understanding and major adjustments are required from today's youth and,
moreover, these demands are forever increasing. Rapid industrialization, urbanization,
technological progress, knowledge explosion, exposure to alien ideas and cultures,
increasing dependency and unemployment place the modem youth at a serious
disadvantage. There is no sure guide to successful living in this tumultuous age.
The man of today is a product of his own time. What is more distressing is the spate
of anxieties which man is subject to.
Adult Dependence
Today dependency does not imply physical helplessness but economic dependence.
Today it is inconceivable and illegal for a child of ten to work. Hence, the period
of dependency of modem youth is getting progressively lengthened. The more
civilized we are, the longer is the period of dependency of the youth. Besides the


--- PAGE 77 ---
Developmental Characteristics of Youth 57
usual stresses experienced by youth there are certain special problems created by
our society which youth encounters. These may be concerned with learning in
school, stagnation, delinquency, drug abuse and the like. The problem-ridden youth
requires understanding and sympathetic help for the resolution of such problems.
Youth and h$ Concems
Youth, in contemporary times, is exposed to several conflicdng, distracdng, difficult
and stressful situadons. In the past, young people generally tended to rely on the
advice, wisdom and judgement of their elders. In modem times, owing to their
exposure to other cultural milieu through mass media, books, travel and to some
extent through personal contacts with others, they arc often tempted to imitate and
emulate other modes and patterns of behaviour. Such influence someUmes creates
distressing problems of adjustment They appear to be increasingly groping for a
meaning in life consonant with their ideas and expectadons. Owing to several
socio-economic and polidcal factors, a significant secdon of youth is becoming
estranged and alienated from society. The growth of radical youth movements all
over the world is an illustradon of this phenomenon. Youth is getdng increasingly
involved in revoldng against tradidonal, social, polidcal and racial injusdces. Other
forms of expression of youth revolt may be found in their resort to drug abuse,
espousal of the hippie culture, etc. These are only extreme examples of protest
resorted to by some youth. Fortunately, however, the vast muldtude of young men
and women are only confronted with common issues that have to resolved
sadsfactorily for normal adjustment to the demands of growing up. First of all these
young people growing into adults have to learn to relate themselves to the adult
members of their society. This apparently matter-of-fact issue is not as simple as
it appears to be, for it involves the transidon from dependence to independence.
They have to become independent in different spheres of life—economic,
occupational, social, etc. Becoming self-dependent or independent would ipsofacto
mean becoming responsible for one's own decisions and acdons. This could be a
highly stressful and somedmes even a painful experience for young people.
Individuals cannot live in isolation. The very nature of social life involves
interdependence which could also pose problems for youth.
The other related issues comprise making normal sex adjustments, finding a
vocation that will be absorbing, inspiring and satisfying and obtairung a desirable
social status. Last, but not the least, is the issue of finding a meaning in life; in
other words, having a sound philosophy of life. In regard to all these issues, youth
is called upon to make choices from a welter of disconcerting alternatives. It is
through this process of making choices that development takes place.
According to Tyler (1953), making choices is a major aspect of development
Therefore, the function of counselling is to help clarify alternatives so as to make
the right decisions. In making the right choice, one cannot only follow one's
inclinations. Then one can strive to convert some possibilities into actualities. For
Tyler, therefore, counselling is non-therapeutic. Her view of counselling relates
mainly to developmental and not to pathological problems.
Youth exhibits a robust sense of optimism. Their time orientations are not the
same as the adult modes of looking at reality. Remoteness in time does not overly


--- PAGE 78 ---
58 Counselllnssnd Guidance
concern the youth. Jhey lend to be swayed by considerations of the present or the
immediate future in preference to the demands of the distant future. Their over-
optimism is often followed by. painful disillusionment They also tend to identify
themselves very closely with some persons, while being unable to deal with others
in a reasonable manner. These difficulties arise largely from their limited experience
with reality. One reason may be that many are over-protected at home and, therefore,
have not had occasion to make an independent choice.
Adolescence is also characterized by fantasy and day-dreaming. Erickson
introduced the phrase 'identic crisis' about four decades ago to explain the adolescent
period of internal stress. Most adolescents suffer from an identity crisis. Society no
longo' considers them young enough to be created as children nor is it prepared to
treat them as adults and entrust them with adult responsibilities. This amorphous
position causes the identic crisis and feelings of alienation. Their emotional turmoil
makes them anxious and most youth become emotionally brittle and highly strung.
They exhibit different degrees of nervousness and appear to lack confidence in
themselves and to some extent in others as well.
Thus youth, in such an unenviable situation, can be expected to experience
several problems which could be debilitating. The problems of youth broadly fall
under three categories:
1. Emotional problms which include anxiety, hyperscnsitivity, impulsiveness,
moodiness, immaturi^, withdrawal, etc.
2. Motivational problems which include lack of ambition, low aspirational
level, feelings of frustration, negative attitudes, lack of interests, etc.
3. Moral problems which include feelings of guilt, sense of being lost, confused
ideas of right and wrong, delinquencies such as lying, .stealing, unruly
behaviour, etc.
Adolescents who are beset with such problems are not able to function efficiently
in any sphere of activity. Their academic life leaves much to be desired. Their
performance is adversely affected. It is thus obvious that youth, not only as an
important section of the community but also as the future hope of society, require
counselling assistance. Studies made in India by Riddle (1962), Rao (1962,1965,
1967,1974) and others emphasize the need for counselling our youth.
PROBLEMS IN THE INDIAN EDUCATIONAL CONTEXT
The twin problems plaguing the Indian educational scene are: (1) stagnation and (2)
wastage. Stagnation is concerned with the failure of students in examinations. The
Indian educational system has an unparalleled record of over 70% failures at annual
examinations. Efforts made to redeem the situation have not yet been successful.
The Indian population ranks among the second highest in the world. This factor
alone has been nullifying most of the efforts made to solve many of its social
problems. Consequendy a significant section of the populadon (around 40%) is
living below the poverty line and many school and college-going students are
compelled to quit their academic careers to earn a living and add their earnings to.


--- PAGE 79 ---
Developmental Characteristics of Yourii 59
the paltry family income. This contributes to educational wastage. Those who
graduate face the problem of unemployment and this is in spite of the efforts made
by the governments at both the state and central levels.
The problems so far outlined refer to the problems of students in the post-
adolescent and pre-adulthood period. A few resort to crime and delinquency and
the upper-middle and rich among them may resort to drugs and alcohol. An effective
programme of counselling could help clarify feelings and motivate students by
increasing their self-awareness and self-understanding. This is best achieved by
clarifying goals which serve to bridge motivation and thinking.
Collegiate environments'tend to emphasize cognitive pursuits and academic
excellence at the cost of other aspects of student life and needs. Most of the college
students perhaps live for the first time away from their parents and homes. There
is no doubt that for freshmen at college, adjustment poses a host of problems. For
one thing, the freshman arrives on the campus during a critical phase -of his
personality development, namely, adolescence. Adolescence is a deeply internal as
well as environmental crisis, for the adolescent has to adjust himself to rapid
physiological changes taking place within his body as well as the problems that
arise from tlte environment or situations as a consequence of the b^ily changes
that have taken place. He is suddenly left to his own devices to adjust himself to
the demands of the new situation. He has to pick and choose his friends from the
many who join college with him without any outside assistance. He may err and
become a member of an undesirable group. The highly academic and often
unemotional atmosphere of the institution, the severance from home life and the
uncertainties of the hostel or dormitory are some of the situations which could
create acute problems of adjustment for the freshman. Some are successful in
making new friends and discovering new interests, are adequately motivated and
develop a thirst for knowledge. They accept their teachers and fellow students with
confidence. Others are less fortunate, a few become home sick and emotionally
brittle and question the value of the examination system. Others become listless and
seek various forms of retreat like day-dreaming, loafing, etc. (Rao 1963, 1967).
To determine the nature and extent of the problems of students in the Sri
Venkateswara University area and also to sensitize faculty members to students'
needs and problems, a Problem Check List (PCL) was administered to a sample of
2338 male students enrolled in degree classes during 1964—1965 (Rao, 1967).
The data obtained point to an unenviable picture of the situation in which the
students in- India in general, and those of the S.V. University area in particular,
were placed. Of all the problems reported, those in the area of finance were most
important. The students seem to be put to several hardships owing to the meagre
financial resources available to them. The presence of a large percentage of first
generation students in educational institutions today, who have had no necessaiy
guidance with regard to proper and efficient methods of study, was highlighted by
the findings of the study. This makes it imperative for the institution to assume the
(additional) responsibilities of providing guidance and making available the necessaiy
facilities for acquiring desirable study habits and skills. Most teachers and
administrators seemed to be under the mistaken impression that the students would
"somehow acquire the necessary study skills and practices as a matter of natural


--- PAGE 80 ---
50 Counsellingand Guidance
development". Unfortunately this does not seem to be true as a very large percentage
of students reported difficulties in this area. The students also reported problems in
the area of personal adjustment The provision of necessary assistance may go a
long way in easing emotional tensions and anxieties which contribute to the
debilitation and dissipation of student energies. The results show that it is
fundamentally wrong for the teachers and administrators to delude themselves with
the idea that the Indian student is irresponsible and apathetic. The fact that they
(students) are conscious of and are concerned about their parents' anxieties and
worries is sufficient indication of their seriousness of purpose.
The disruption of orderly student life on campuses in India is not a result of the
irresponsibility of students. It is a symptom of a deep-rooted complex of
maladjustment, which is enhanced by feelings of personal insecurity, inadequate
facilities for work and recreation, growing incertitude about the future, lack of an
optimum level of personal efficiency, etc.
If academic standards are to be raised and student unrest minimized, it is
imperative that we.provide sound values through relevant and stimulating education.
Students often acquire unworthy and inappropriate values through associating and
being influenced by undesirable groups. If a healthy change in the value system is
desired it may be accomplished through situations which provide a desirable feed
back. In this regard hostel mates and faculty members can help engender desirable
changes in the students* value system. Students could be encouraged to establish
a relaxed intellectual relationship with a member of the faculty. Such contacts
would help promote intellectual excellence. Counselling would help mitigate the
adjustmental problems and check the growing cynicism and psychological inertia
in students in India (Rao, 1967),
The child guidance centre, the school psychologist, the counselling centre and
other such agencies are increasingly being called upon to shoulder the responsibilities
of giving succour to alleviate the avoidable suffering caused by developmental
hazards and tensions. No society can afford to ignore the basic need to render help
to the youth.


--- PAGE 81 ---
C@unBelling and Gnldance-
Expectations and Goals
imnoDUcnoN
A young man calls at the student counselling centre. He Is tense and anxious. He
calls at the centre because he has some problem or difTicuI^. Another young man
calls as he has heard £rom his hiends that psychological tests are administered at
the centre, and he is keen and inquisitive to know about his 'personality'. Yet
another calls at the centre for a different reason. He desires to know about efficient
study skills. Thus different individuals have varying needs. Some of these needs
may be unfulfilled causing frustration, and clients may want to find techniques or
methods of resolving their conflicts and fulfllling their needs.
Thus individuals se^ the help of others in a varies of situations. The assistance
sought may be as simple as asking for a small piece of information or as complex
as asking for assistance for solving some cmcial problem. The latter ^pe of problem
is encountered as frequently as the former. When the problems are adjudged to be
too difHcult to be tackled without outside help, one can approach different individuals
and agencies depending on the nature of the problem one is facing. For example,
individuals approach lawyers, physicians, psychiatrists, psychologists, clergymen,
social workers, teachers and others for assistance to help solve different kinds of
problems.
Counselling and psychotherapy developed as methods of rehabilitqUon. The
concern was to help those considered 'off the track' and unable to adjust to life.
This popularized the view that psychotherapists and counsellors were persons who
helped individuals return to normal. Gradually the counselling process came to be
understood as a means of prevention as much as treatment More recently counselling
has come to be viewed as an instrument or technique of self-actualization. It is
no longer enough for an individual to be 'well' and 'unsick', it is necessary
that he becomes the best he is capable of and counselling must help him in this
process. This offers a challenging and creative role for the counsellor. It is not
enough to maintain staius quo, counselling should go further to help the client
transcend the status quo.


--- PAGE 82 ---
^2 Counselling and Guidance
expectations of different individuals
Individuals have wide-ranging expectations regarding counselling. They expect
counseUing to enable them to face their problems, find soluuons for them, helpimprove themselves, and so on. The expectations of different individuals varysignificantly. What specific expectations a client has depends on several factorssuch as clients seeking external assistance to find solutions to their problems.
Others strive to solve their problems primarily through self-improvement Further,
some have simple expectations which are easy to accomplish, while others may haveexpectations impossible to achieve. For some their expectations arise from their
past experience. whUe in the case of others, they may have diverse sources. It is
therefore necessary at the outset to recognize that clients' expectations could be
diverse and they may not always be in agreement with the goals and objectives of
counselling.
In general, counsellees usually expect counselling to provide solutions to their
problems. The problems could be diverse—^personal, social, academic, vocational
and so on. The expectations naturally could vary with the nature of the problems.
For instance, students with study problems expect counselling to help them achieve
beu^ academic performance thm would satisfy their parents and teachers. Individuals
experiencing anxieties expect to be relieved of their tensions. They expect counselling
to bring relief from stress and to help the indecisive make correct choices. Those
seeking employment expect counselling to secure them quick placement and enable
them to auain job satisfaction and rapid rise. In brief, individu^s expect counselling
to significantly better their life patterns and help them adjust to changing situations.
Parents believe that counselling has a persuasive function and expect it to help
in the educational and vocational development of their children. Further, they expect
it to remedy many of their children's deficiencies. So far as counsellors are concerned,
most of the parents* expectations are naive, unrealistic and highly exaggerated.
Teachers expect counselling to reduce, if not eliminate, undesirable pupil
behavioiu", help improve class-room climate, reduce inter-personal tensions among
pupils and promote discipline. It is also not uncommon among teachers to assume
that counselling identifies and fosters talent School and college administrators
expect counselling services to help in the efficient functioning of their institutions
by reducing conflicts and fiiction among the personnel. They also expect counselling
to remove inefficient learning practices among the pupils. They thus expect it to
remedy each and every educational difficulty. This is evidently not only an unrealistic
but also an unreasonable expectation.
The experience at the Student Counselling Centre, Sri Venkateswara University,
has been rewarding and revealing. Students (prospective counsellees) call at the
centre for different reasons. Ihey include such problems as girl friends, finance,
studies, relations with tethers, etc. Howeva- most students complain about anxiety,
nightmares, sleeplessness, inability to remembw what was leamt, poor concentration,
etc. Yet others want to be equipped to take competitive examinations and to face
interviews confidently.
A few parents who frequently visit the centre refer to the odd behaviour,
moodiness, listlessness, etc., of their sons. Parents of daughters have yet to visit the


--- PAGE 83 ---
CounseUIng 3nd Guidance—Eigxctadons and Coals 63
Student Counselling Centre. Teachers have so far only referred cases of problem
students and inquired whether anything can be done for them. The experience at
this Centre has been quite limited but it is believed that the pattern of public
attitudes to student maladjustment elsewhere in India would largely conform to this
picture.
What emerges from this brief statement of expectations is that there is a certain
amount of overlap in the expectations of students, parents, teachers and
administrators. All are concerned with the improvement of academic performance
and the reducing of tension on campuses, in addition to other things. What is most
significant in practically all cases is that they are impatient and want immediate
solutions to their problems.
To expect counselling to serve disciplinary purposes is to denigrate and defeat
the very essence of counselling. In defence of the counsellor it should be said that
counselling can help those who are prepared to help themselves and those who
want to be helped, but it cannot change human nature magically.
Divergent expectations result from a lack of adequate and proper understanding
and appreciation of counselling goals. Failure to understand the basic nature of
counselling has led to unrealistic demands and annoying disappointments.
Counselling, properly appreciated and understood, would help dispel most of the
false expectations and foster healthy attitudes towards counselling in socieQr, which
in turn would help in the efficient functioning of counselling.
v^OUNSELUNG GOALS
rThe> counsellor has the goal of understanding the behaviour, motivations and feelings
of the counsellee. The counsellor's goals are not limited to understanding tus clients.
He has different goals at different levels of functioning. The immediate goal, however,
is to obtain relief for the client and the long-range goal is to make him a 'fully-
functioning person'. Both the immediate and long-term goals are secured throu^what are toown as mediate or process goals.
The goal of counselling is to help individuals overcome their immediate problems
and also to equip them to meet future problems. Rapid social change brought about
by industrialization and urbanization has led to several perplexing problems. The
pace of this change is ever on die increase, thus making adjustment a continuous
process of grappling with new atuations. Counselling, to be meaningful, has to be
specific for each client since it involves his unique problems and expectations. Hie
goals of counselling may be described as immediate, long-range, and process goals.
A statement of goals is not only important but also necessary, for it provides a
sense of direction and purpose. Additionally, it is necessary for a meaningful
evaluation of the usefulness of it. It is only in terms of the defined goals that it is
possible to judge the meaningfulness or otherwise of any activity, including
coui^selling. It establishes a congruency between what is demanded or sought and
what is possible or practical.
Specific counselling goals are unique to each client and involve a consideration
of the client's expectations as well as the environmental aspects. Apart from the


--- PAGE 84 ---
Counselling and Guidance
specific goals ihere are. however, two categories of goals which are common to
most counselling situations, ntese are identified as long-range and process go^s.The lattft'' have great significance. They shape the counsellee and counsellorsrelations and behaviour. The process goals comprise facilitating procedures for
enhancing the effectiveness of counselling. The long-range goals are those that
reflect the counsellor's philosophy of life and could be stated as:
1. To help the counsellee become self-actualizing.
2. To help the counsellee auain self-realization.
3. To help the counsellee become a fully-functioning person.
The immediate goals of counselling refer to the problems for which the client
is seeking solutions, here and now. The client fails to utilize his capacities fiilly and
efficiently and, therefore, is unable to function efficiently. The counsellee could be
helped to gain fuller self-understanding through self-exploration and to appreciate
his strengths and weaknesses. The counsellor could provide necessary information
but information, however exhausdve, may not be useful to the client unless he
has an integrative understanding of himself vis-a-vis his personal resources and
enviromnental constraints and resources.
The long-range and immediate goals are not unrelated. There is an inter-relation
between them as both depend on the process goals for their realization. Hie process
goals are the basic counselling dimensions which are essential conditions for
counselling to take place. They comprise empathic understanding, warmth and
friendliness which provide for inter-personal exploration which, in turn, helps the
client in his self-exploration and self-understanding and eventually lead to the long-
range goals, namely, self-acuialization, self-realization and self-enhancement. The
client may have certain inhibiting and self-destructive patterns of behaviour which
are eliminated and overcome to enable the individual become a fully-functioning
person.
Discussing the goals of counselling, Parloff (1961) distinguishes between
immediate and ultimate goals. According to him, the former refers to the steps and
stages in the counselling process which lead to the realization of the ultimate goals.
Patterson (1970) suggests a third level of goals, namely, intermediate goals, in
addition to mediating and ultimate goals. Ultimate goals refer to the broad and
general long-term outcomes like positive mental health. For example, competence
in driving, as a goal, cannot be viewed as an ultimate goal. Psychological
effectiveness appears to be a related concept. When the goals of counselling are
stated as 'self-actualization', 'self-realization', 'self-enhancement', etc., it is often
difficult to find a meaningful and suitable criterion to evaluate the achievement or
otherwise of the goals. These concepts appear to be meaningful as ultimate goals.
Self-actualization and the like refer to the general goal of life. Since life is not
static, self-actualization as a goal of life cannot be static—it is a continuous process.
Goldstein (1939) states that an organism is governed by a tendency to actualize
as much as possible its individual capacities, its nature in the world. In the words
of Rogers (1951), "the organism has one basic tendency and striving to actualize,
maintain and enhance the experiencing organism". Snygg and Combs (1959) refer
to the enhancement of the self as the "all inclusive human need which motivates


--- PAGE 85 ---
Counselling and Guidance—Expectations and Coals 65
all behaviour at all times and in all places". The concept of self-actualization is a
universal need and, therefore, may be looked upon as an ultimate good because it
is the goal of life. May (1967) slates that the goal of therapy (counselling is
interpreted as a form of therapy throughout this book) is to help the patient to
actualize his potentialities. According to Byrne (1963), the ultimate goals derive
substance from the conceptions of universal man and the nature of life. Intermediate
goals are explained by the reasons for seeking a counsellor's help, and immediate
goals as those that refer to the present intentions of the counsellee.
A major criticism levelled is that goals such as 'self-actualization', 'actualizing
potentialities', etc., are too general and amorphous and hence not useful in actual
practice. Krumboltz (1966) holds that an operational definition of terms would be
a more useful approach. He suggests that a general concept could be reduced to
specific, objective and measurable variables. Ultimate goals, owing to their very
broad and general nature, cannot be evaluated as immediate or mediate goals.
Mediate goals (Parloff, 1967) maiy be considered as specific steps contributing
to the realization of general goals. Behaviourists place much emphasis on mediate
goals. These comprise the reduction of anxiety, feeling of hostility, undesirable
habits, etc., on the negative side; and the increase of pleasure, acquisition of adaptive
habits, understanding of self, etc., on the positive side. The immediate goal of
counselling is to motivate a potential counsellee to make an appointment with a
counsellor and go through the counselling process till the mediate goals are realized.
It is through the realization of mediate goals that the ultimate goals of 'self-
understanding*, 'self-realization* and 'self-actualization* can be reached. The process
of self-exploration is perhaps a kind of immediate goal which sets the counselling
process in modon.
According to Rogers (1951), an important outcome of counselling is that the
client feels less anxious about the possibility of achieving his goals. Rogers (1954)
further holds that counselling produces a change in personality organization and
behaviour, both of which are relatively permanent. Areas in which change is
considered desirable are relations with other individuals, academic achievement,
job satisfaction, etc. Desirable change may be understood as the bringing about of
more positive responses to frustrating situations through adopting different attitudes
towards other people as well as towards oneself.
Some of the major goals of counselling generally accepted by counsellors are
given below.
Achievement of Positive Mental Health
The need for mental health cannot be over-emphasized. It is identified as an important
goal of counselling by some individuals who claim that when one reaches or
secures positive mental health, one learns to adjust and responds more positively
to people and situations. Others hold that prevention of emotional tensions, anxieties,
indecision and such other problems is also an important goal of counselling. They
hold the view that counselling should lead to positive feelings of warmth arid of
being liked. Kell and Mueller (1962) hold that the "promotion and development of
feelings of being liked, sharing with, and receiving and giving interaction rewards
from other human beings is the legitimate goal of counselling".


--- PAGE 86 ---
56 Counselling and Guidance
Resolution of Problems
Another goal of counselling is the resolving of the problem brought to the counsellor.
This, in essence, is an outcome of the former goal and Implies positive mental
health. In behavioural terms three categories of behavioural goals can be identified,
namely, altering maladaptive behaviour, learning the decision-making process and
preventing problems (Krumboltz, 1966). Wolpe (1958) feels that goal of
counselling is to relieve the suffering and disability of the clients.
Impro^dng Personal Effectiveness
Yet another goal of counselling is that of improving personal eficctivencss. This is
closely related to the preservation of good mental health and securing desirable
behavioural change(s). Blocher (1966) defines an effective person as one who is
able to commit himself to projects, investing time and energy and willing to take
appropriate economic, psychological and physical risks. He is seen as having the
competence to reorganize, define and solve problems. He is seen as reasonably
consistent outside and within his ^ical role sittiation. He is seen as being able to
Wnk in different and original, that is, creative ways. Finally, he is able to control
impulses and produce appropriate responses to fiostration, hostility and ambiguity.
Counselling to Help Change
Blocher (196^ adds two other goals. The first, according to him, is that counselling
should maximize individual freedom to choose and act within the conditions imposed
by the environment. The other goal is that counselling should increase the
effectiveness of the individual responses evolved by the environment. Tiedeman(1964) holds that the goal of counselling is to focus on the mechanism of changeand that the counsellee should be helped in the process of 'becoming'—the change
which pervades period of adolescence through early adulthood during which the
individual is assisted to actualize his potential. Shoben (1965) also views the goalof counselling as personal development.
Decision-Making as a Goal of Counselling
Some MtinwUors hold the view that counselling should enable the counsellee tomake d^isions. It is through the process of making critical decisions that personalgrowth IS fostei^. Reaves and Reaves (1965) point out that "the primary objective
of counseUing IS that of stimulating the individuals to evaluate, make, accept and
act upon his choice". Counselling is to help individuals learn as to what is neededin choice making, by which is meant that the individual should leam to make
decisions mdependently. it has been stressed more than once that it is not for the
counsellor to m^ decisions for his clients. If it were so, it would cease to be
counseUing. Decisions are always the counsellees' own, and they are responsible
for themselves. In other words, the counsellees should know how and why they
made the concerned deci<;innc! in .. infnrmntinn mnv


--- PAGE 87 ---
Counselling and Guidance—ExpectaOons and Coals 67
this such that the counsellee is able to make responsible decisions. Tyler (I96I)
also defines the goal of counselling as decision-making. The counsellor has to help
the counsellee utilize the resources—intra-personal and environmental—available
and make decisions based on them to cope with life situations.
Sometimes the counsellees have goals which are vague and their implications
are not fully appreciated. It is perhaps one of the primary functions of a counsellor
to help clarify a counsellee's goal. This is possible because of the counsellor's
background, professional training and rich experience. Often, underlying the
seemingly confusing multiplicity of goals there is a common factor. Some of the
goals reflect the subjective expectations of the counsellors themselves. The different
goals elucidated by counsellors give the counsellees the choice of making free,
informed and responsible decisions, being fully conscious of their own strengths,
weaknesses, assets and liabilities.
Modification of Behaviour as a Goal
Behavioiually-oriented counsellors stress the need for modification of behaviour,
for example, removal of undesirable behaviour or action or reduction of an irritating
symptom such that the individual attains satisfaction and effectiveness. Growth-
oriented counsellors stress on the development of potentialities within the individual.
Existentially-oriented counsellors stress self-enhancement and self-fulfilment.
Obviously the latter cannot be realized without first securing- the former, namely,
symptom removal or reduction as a necessary pre-condition for personal
effectivene^
SUMMARY
From the brief explanation of expectations and goals of counselling. It will be
seen that there may be differences between the expectations of the clients and
the goals of the counsellors. These differences could cause dlssatlsfectlon,
misunderstanding and Irritation. Most persons, Informed and uninformed alike,
believe that counselling is something that is done for the counsellee. It is
commonly believed that a counsellor resolves the clients' problems. But
counsellors have different goals and it was explained that counselling alms to
bring about a positive action on the part of the courrsellee, and change his
perceptions, understanding, goals and values ty his own conscious efforts. The
general public tends to view counselling as a remedial function and emphcisizes
immediate goals, such as problem resolution, tension reduction, and the like.
Counsellees may refer to the resolution of a particular conflict or problem situation.
However, the goals of counselling are appropriately concerned with such
fundamental and basic aspects as self-understanding and self-actualization. These
help provide the courtsellee with self-direction and self-mottvatlon. Counselling
In its spirit and essence Is generative. It aims at assisting the Individual to
develop such that he becomes psychologically mature and is capable of realizing
his potentialities optimally.
One other mistaken notion needs elaboration: that counselling is a sort of
panacea—all one has to do Is to ask for the needed help and the courrsellor will


--- PAGE 88 ---
~r 63 Counseling and Guidance
produce an Instant remedy. This naive view Is absurd. Counselling has no nwglcal
solutions. The only meaningful, sensible and realistic view of counselling Is that
It is not and cannot be eveiythlrrg to everybody. It Is concerned with helping
Individuals And realistic and workable solutions to their problems by helping
fliem gain an Insight Into ttiemselves so that th^ are able to utilize their own
potentialities and opportunities and thus become self-suffldent. self-directed
and self-actuallzed.


--- PAGE 89 ---
Appir©siclhi<8s to Counsmllin'
INTRODUCTION
In keeping with the complexity of human nature and the varying attempts to explain
it as lucidly and succinctly as possible, several theories of human behaviour have
been proposed. Each theory seeks to integrate its postulates consistently with the
specified hypotheses constincted. The theory is then verified in terms of experimental
findings or observational data. Further, a Uteory is integrated in what is known as
a meaningful framework. Within this framework it predicts new relations and
outcomes and seeks to obtain solutions to the anticipated problems. Most of the
criteria of a good theory have been stated with great care by scientists. A theory
is considered acceptable if it meets the criteria, the most important being precision,
clarity and comprehensiveness i.e., it should include within its scope as many facts
or phenomena as possible, provide for empirical verifiability and stimulate research.
The usefulness of a theory is considerably enhanced if it defines its terms
operationally. This would help develop suitable procedures for testing the derived
propositions. Some theories impose serious limitations on the verifiability of their
predictions owing to lack of operationally defined propositions and concepts.
Different approaches to counselling are based on the varying conceptions of
human personality structure and dynamics, and are subject to the limitations to
which the person^ity theories are prone. The term 'approach' is used in preference
to 'theory' as no single theory has yet been able to encompass all the aspects of
counselling.
Coimselling therapies could broadly be divided into two major categories: (1)
supportive and (2) insight therapies.
Supportive therapies believe in restoring the individual's adaptive capacities by
teaching him new ways to maintain and control by strengthening the existing defenses
against anxiety. Supportive therapies may involve persuasion, pressure and coercion,
reassurance, environmental manipulation, prestige suggestion, suggestive hypnosis,
muscular relaxation, use of drugs and electric shocks. Behaviour modification and
learning theory approaches can be placed under this type of supportive therapy.
Insight therapies are broadly of two kinds: (1) re-educative and (2) reconstructive.
These therapies differ fixim the supportive approaches in that they try to release
what has been called the self-actualizing tendency in the individual. Insight therapies,
instead of removing the anxiety-producing sources or factors in the life of the
individual, bolster behaviour that permits and enables the individual to cope with
anxiety. They attempt to reduce, and if possible, remove anxiety by altering the


--- PAGE 90 ---
70 Counselllngand Culdanee
individual's perceptions. Re-educative approaches to therapy are directed toward
producing more harmonious self-structure. Rogers' client-centered approach is an
outstanding example of insight therapy with rc-educative goals (Tucker, 1970).
The reconstructive approach to therapy has for its objective the gaining of insight
into an individual's unconscious conflicts, thereby bringing about extensive alteration
in the individual's character structure and the release of energies for the development
of new adaptive capacities. Freudian and other psychoanalytic approaches to
psychotherapy adumbrate this point of view.
In this ch^ter some of the representative ^tproaches to counselling are considered.
THE DIRECTIVE OR AUIHORrTARIAN APPROACH (PSYCHOANALVnC)
The authoritarian point of view is largely associated with the work of Sigmund
Freud. According to the psychoanalytic theory, the client is ignorant and unaware
of the reasons for his difficulties or suffering which are deeply embedded in the
unconscious. The client is, therefore, helpless and it is the therapist who has to play
the role of interpreting the material for him/her. The psychological difficulties,
according to psychoanalysis, are explained as phenomena that are strictly
psychologically determined. This principle is known as psychological determinism,he peisonality structure is explained to comprise the id, the ego and the superego,
f rw source of all energy which is sought to be expanded feu- the gratification0  ibidinous urges. The id functions on the 'pleasure principle' and is subject to
. ® eiTor, that is, it confuses the idea or image of an object for the objectitee . The ego is essentially a part of the id which has been socialized as a result
0 Its contect with reality. The ego, therefore, functions on the 'reality principle*
M as often to turn down the demands of the id. Consequently, tension develops
•t ^ develops from the id and is a part of1  e superego also develops from the id. However, the superego and ego are not
1  purpose. The superego is the moral governor
° ti conscience. A very important distinction between the ego^ . e superego is that the former is conscious while the latter is not conscious,e I , owing to its iwimitive and unsocialized nature, is raw, infantile and irrational,
e superego parties of the characteristics of the id. ^en the id desires gratificaticmo I urge or wish , its energy is drawn and expended by the ego. The superego
a o uses the libidmal energy of the id for its activity. The ego and the superego
ave no mdependent source of energy. In all action, there is a transfer of energy
m one to another. The sum total of all energy remains constant and this explains
e pnncip e of^uilibrium of energy in the psychic system comprising the id, egoand superego. The Iibidinal urges emanating from the region of the id are gratified
wougn the ego. Therefore without the ego, the id is blind and helpless. But the
demands of the id are not always manageable. Sometimes they may be grotesque
and bizarre. They may even be incestuous. The ego cannot gratify such demands
and turns them down. This process is known as inhibition. Inhibition is a normal
process and it is one of the defense mechanisms commonly employed by the ego.
Often the Iibidinal urges may come into direct conflict with the injunctions of the


--- PAGE 91 ---
Approaches to Counselling 71
superego. The result is repression. A repressed idea, wish or desire is relegated to
the depths of the unconscious or id but does not become extinct. A repressed wish
or idea is dynamic and ever active and wants to thrust itself into the region of the
conscious.
The human personality has two basic urges, namely, Eros—the urge to live—
the life instinct, and Thanatos the urge to die—the death instinct The Eros is the
creative force and the Thanatos is the destructive or self-destructive force. The ego
has to deftly balance these two instinctual urges and personality development is a
result of this process. Freud assumes that the early part of childhood is the most
important in the personality development of the individual. The highly emotionally
charged ideas cdled complexes are repressed during this early part of life and
Freud explains that what the adult individual experiences as a problem is only the
result of a repressed complex in his early childhood Psychotherapy or psychoanalysis
is a method of unearthing these repressed complexes and this process is called
catharsis. When a repressed idea is brought to the conscious and inteipreted it
ceases to be a problem. The symptom caused by it disappears.
The psychoanalytic point of view, as e;q)lained by Freud, looks upon the individual
as a biological endty craving for the gratification of instinctual lUges. The present
state or condition of the individual is determined by the active forces (libidinous
gratifications, Hxations, repressions, etc.) operating in his early childhood. The
present environmental conditions as represented by the social forces have little, if
any, role to play in the manner in which libidinous urges are expressed.
Harper (1959) identifies four important concepts which, acco^ng to him, are
central to the Freudian point of view:
1. The concept of bisexuality of human beings—^This idea, later elaborated
by Adler, is a natural phenomenon observable in the lower organisms.
The concept of bisexuality implies homosexuality. Since homosexuality
is not accepted in most cultures, it constitutes rich material for repression
and formadon of complexes with different degrees of emodonal charge.
2. The concept of bipolarity of human nature—This underlies the love-hate
reladonship. Posidve feelings are always accompanied by negadve feelings.
According to Freud, excess of love or affection is only a subterfuge for
underlying hate.
3. The concept of sublimation—This is perhaps the most valuable of all Freudian
concepts. F^reud explains that all higher things, finer things and nobler things
are only sublimates of their opposites. In modem chemistry it is known that
the ugly coaltar gives the most exotic perfumes and brilliant colours. Freud
holds the process of civilization to be an instance of sublimation. The incestual
and sexual urge is sublimated and the finest creations, such as music,
sculpture, art and literature are all a result of it.
4. The concept of displacement—^Freud discovered this phenomenon of
displacement in his analysis of dreams. Usually the object or goal or motive
is disguised by substituting it with something else. The process is known
as displacement. -In modem living displacement is perhaps one of the
most important modes of survival. For example, one may get very angry
with a stronger or more powerful person. It may be suicidal to give vent to


--- PAGE 92 ---
72 Counselling and Guidance
this anger. Instead, the individual may let out steam on a weak or helpless
being.
The most harrowing part of human life is anxiety. Anxiety may be real when
there is a fear of loss of a loved object, or anxiety may be neurotic, when there is
a fear of no particular thing. Such a vague feeling of fear arises when the ego is
in constant threat of being overrun by the id. The neurotic anxiety may be free-
floating, phobic or panic.
Strong feelings of helplessness, hopelessness, impending disaster, tension, misery,
restlessness, visceral responses, physiological complaints, etc., are the varied aspects
of a generalized anxiety reaction which is cued off by events that reawaken conflicts
and fearful anticipations experienced in childhood. Acute manifestations of anxiety
are inexplicable because they seem so inappropriate to the current circumstances.
They have no connection with the objective reality. The anxiety reactions are called
neurotic because they are inappropriate. Nemotic anxiety reactions vary in intensity
from those involving mild symptoms of restlessness, visceral and somatic
disturbances to those involving panic and acute episodes of extreme fright, misery,
behaviour disorganization, trembling, fainting or the blotting out of memory. Anxiety
reactions may relatively focal, in the sense that they are elicited by specific cues
or environmental circumstances. Other anxiety reactions appear to be the result of
a steady build-up of conflictual or anxiety producing events in the individual's life
^ that given the processes of generalization and incubation, so many cues in the
individual's life elicit anxiety that it becomes a chronic response.
The real nature depends upon the threat of the id. Another kind of anxiety is
identified as moral anxiety which grows out of feelings of being punished by the
superego or the conscience. Defense mechanisms are resorted to, to cope with
frustrations arising from anxieties.
"Hie classical psychoanalytic technique consists in bringing repressed wishes,
desires and complexes to the conscious level. This process is long, arduous and
time consuming. The client usually resists and resistance is one of the two
psychoanalytic phenomena which serves a dual purpose. On the one hand, resistancepreven^ the repressed idea, desire or wish from surfacing. This process is natural
Md universal. However, encountering resistance in the psychoanalytic process is an
indication of the progress of therapy. If resistance is not encountered no therapy
worth its name evCT takes place. The second important psychoanalytic concept is
the phenomenon of transference. This is the highly sensitive, emotionally charged
relationship between the client and the psychoanalyst. Transference can easily mislead
a therapist and may prove to be tiresome. Successful therapy consists in managing
transference and directing it to its appropriate object
The psychoanalytic therapy consists of the 'talking' method in which the client
is asked to^ rel^ on a couch and give free expression to any and every idea that
comes to his mind. The psychoanalyst sits behind the client outside his visual field
so that he does not give any visual, facial or gestural cues to the client. The analyst
patiently prods the client through a series of sessions until the crucial complexes
are brought to the surface. In this process the analyst has to successfully manage
the phenomena of resistance and transference. Dream material is often anaiyzed
and used in the explanation of the complexes.


--- PAGE 93 ---
Approaches to Counselllrtg 73
From the point of view of therapy, psychoanalysis has not found much favour
because it is time-consuming and expensive. During the life time of Freud his close
associates and followers initiated several modifications which found favour with
many clients. These shall be discussed presently.
The first two decades of the present century saw the development of
psychoanalysis and during the following three decades the work of Freud stimulated
a great deal of interest in the affective or emotional aspects of human personality.
The Christian religion was to a large extent responsible for the neglect of the study
of the affective part of the man's life. Man's purported rationality was highly
exaggerated into a dogma that rationality governed man's day-to-day affairs. Like
Copernicus, Freud helped to dispel yet another pet notion that man's actions are
governed by rationality as he is made in the image of God. Most of Freud's
hypothetical explanations, fOT example, defense mechanisms, resistance, transference,
catharsis, etc.. helped students of human behaviour to gain new insights and their
attempts to understand human nature were encouragingly rewarding.
RELEVANCE OF PSYCHOANALYSIS TO COUNSELLING
Psychoanalysis was found to have varying degrees of success with different ^pes
of clients plagued by different kinds of psychological ailments. Counselling is
concerned with clients who have problems that do not compare by any stretch of
imagination with those of psychoneurosis or psychosis. Most of the counselling
problems are simple, mild to moderately disturbing and are usually of a brief
duration. The psychoanalytic technique, as pracUced, requires enormous time and
most counselling clients cannot spare that much time for therapy. Due to such
practical reasons the psychoanalytic approach is not usually employed in coimselling
situations. We shall examine the alternative approaches one by one.
Some of the major criticisms levelled against psychoanalysis are the following:
1. The deterministic view of man portrays him as a nasty person drivOT
relentlessly by animalistic insdncts, unconscious needs and repressed urges.
2. Freud's system implies the dualism of the body and mind as a distinct
phenomena which emphasizes psychosomatic phenomena or 'reaction
formations'.
3. Too much emphasis is placed upon childhood experiences and the present
maladjustment is sought to be explained on the basis of some experience in
early childhood. This would make the individual feel helpless and incapable
of overcoming his difficulties.
4. In Freud's system all behaviour is determined by the psychic energy which
could flow into or towards one object or another. This explanation minimizes
the importance of situational events.
5. Freud minimizes the role of rationality in human behaviour. But in ther^y
Freud £q)pears to unwittingly take recourse to rationality. In psychoanalysis
the repressed material is brought out and interpreted for the client and this
makes him understand his irrational fears, complexes, etc., that is. the
individual becomes more knowledgeable.


--- PAGE 94 ---
74 Counsellingand Guidance
6. The constructs have not been shown to be empirically demonstrable or
veririable.
However, the most significant contribution of Freud and his psycho-analytic
technique cannot be underestimated. The Freudian discovery that man is often
motivated in thought and behaviour by unconscious impulses is of great significance.
Freud designed a model for use in interviews as a therapeutic measure. He was
perhaps the first among psychologists to identify die importance of anxiety. He also
contributed towards maldng psychotherapy more professional by maintaining that
the therapist must have a non-moralizing attitude.
Even during the heydays of the psychoanalytic movement, there was a revolt in
the camp of psychoanalysis and this centred round the need for re-emphasizing the
social nature of man. This movement was led by Adier who proposed that man is
an out and out social being and hence all his problems arise in the social context.
According to Adler, the basic desire in all human beings is the desire to belong.
This is called social interest Every human being is primarily concerned with finding
his place in the community. Unfortunately some individuals, under false notions,
adopt mistaken approaches that lead them astray and create social tensions and
problems. In expressing their mastery motive and realizing their "will to power",
individuals try to overact and when they are unable to reach out develop inferioriQ'
feelings which result from their real or imaginary handicaps and weaknesses. The
human infant is borii into a world of which he knows nothing. Human life is so
complex that one cannot rely on a few instincts as most animals do. Everything
which a human being needs in order to live has to be learnt to be acquired. The
child learns by trial and error and he builds a repertoire of experiences. He develops
some basic ideas as guides for conducting himself. He models himself on his
parents, teachers and others whom he respects. The child observes himself in his
interaction with other adult members. He adopts certain psychological devices to
cope with his situation, The child Mmetimes pretends to be more weak and dependent
than he actually is. this kind of dependency serves him best. In this process he
develops a 'style of life' which underlies his personality. The life style of an
individual accounts for the way he acts in different situations. In psychotherapy,
therefore, it is essential that the life style of the client is clearly understood. This
is done through a couple of interviews. Information regarding the client's family,
his interaction with its members and his early recollections of them is got. This
information gives an insight into his outlook on life and also into his personality
structure and life style.
It is a mistake to assume that the unconscious is responsible for all our actions.
Unconscious thoughts are not unconscious in the sense Freud conceives them. At
any given moment we have an awareness, a conscious field, which may be called
•fovea-centralis*. Beyond this lies a region of vagueness and we are not quite clear
or aware of the things that lie in this region. It corresponds to the dim perception
or sight outside the field of vision. But we can become fully aware and conscious
if we focus our attention on the concerned object Consciousness in the sense of full
awareness is an exception and is extremely limited. Most of the time we are only
partially aware of what we are doing. In this sense we are not aware of die motivation
for all our behaviour.


--- PAGE 95 ---
Approaches to Counselling 75
In Adierian psychotherapy the unconscious is not dealt with. It is concerned
with the 'style of life'. Thus the Adierian approach to psychotherapy is a learning
procedure. It emphasizes the reorientation of the client Ihe client has to gain faith
in his own ability and strength and restore his belief in himself. When the client
has confidence in his own abilities he will improve.
The works of Freud and his followers influenced to different e>ttents the thinking
of counsellors like Darley, Williamson, Rogers and others.
HUMANISTIC APPROACH
In contrast to psychoanalysis, Carl Rogers, 'client-centred' approach to counselling
is more directly related to the field of psychological counselling. He is acclaimed
to be the initiator of the movement, but as we have seen, some of his ideas were
implicit in the Adierian approach. The Rogerian system emerged as a set of
procedures in counselling from his intimate clinical observation. Rogers did not
present his approach as a systematic theory until 1947 when he presented it in his
Presidential address to the American Psychological Association. The ^proach caught
the attention of psychologists because it was related to psychology more than to
medicine. The course of treatment proposed was relatively brief compared to that
of psychoanalysis. The major concepts of 'client-centered' theory thus do not arise
from psychopathology. Its aim was not to cure sick people but to help people live
more satisfying and creative lives. Rogers was influenced to a considerable extent
by the phenomenological psychology popular during that period. He is also counted
as one of the important protagonists of the humanistic approach popularly known
as the 'third force* in psychology.
Client-centered therapy, that is, the practical application of humanistic psychology
made a great impact on the academic scene. According to Rogers, in any kind or
type of psychotherapy the underlying basic theme is the helping relationship. In all
human interactions, such as mother-child, teacher-pupil, therapist-client, etc., the
helping relationship is fundamental. This relationship is one in which the counsellor
seeks to bring about a better appreciation and a clearer expression of the client's
latent inner resources. Thus the helping relationshiup is intended to facilitate the
growth of the person receiving help. Such a growth in individuals is aimed at
improving their functioning and/or accelerating their maturity. This is usually called
psychological growth or psychological maturity. Counselling aims at bringing about
psychological growth or maturity in the client. The helping relationship is, also
generally a one-to-one relationship. It could also be in some specific cases an
individual-group relationship.
Rogers attaches enormous importance to helping relationships. These may often
be looked upon as nurturing and uplifting contacts among people. This can be
exemplified by enumerating the basic characteristics of all helping relationships)
These are:
1. It is meaningful to the persons involved—it implies mutual self-commitment.
2. It has a marked tone of feeling, that is, the individuals who are involved
experience certain emotional states.


--- PAGE 96 ---
76 Counselllngand Guidance
3. It implies integrity—the persons involved are intellectually and emotionally
honest with each other.
4. It can exist by mutual consent only, that is, there is no compulsion. No
person can be compelled to be helpful and similarly no person can be
compelled to receive help.
5. It comes into existence or becomes necessary when one is in need of some
Idnd of help which another can reasonably provide. For instance, an individual
may need information, advice or assistance in a particular situation while
another individual has the necessary knowledge and capacity to provide him
owing to his experience, position or situation.
6. It involves communication and interaction. This may involve non-verbal
behaviour, such as facial expressions, gestures and the like and also direct
verbal communication.
7. It is often strucuired, that is, it is not vague and amorphous. The helping
individual knows what sort of help he could possibly provide and the
individual receiving help knows what kind of help he is in need of.
8. It is sustained through mutual cooperation and collaboration. If a certain
kind of help is provided which is not useful the receiver will indicate the
same, and the helping person will naturally modify his approach.
9. The helping person must have a sense of security. An insecure person
obviously cannot be of much help to the individual who is in need of help.
10. The goal or object of the helping relationship is to change the client positively.
A helping relationship is essentially an attitude which exudes a feeling of
acceptance and a democratic value of life. It implies that the helping relationship
does not in any way make a person feel superior to the one he helps. It also implies
that the helping individual does not impose his values upon the person being
helped.
Such an approach is called the client-centred approach. Understood in this sense,
the client-centred therapy is patently American. It has grown out of the American
democratic way of life and the American values of freedom, individual responsibility,
personal accountability and the right to choose for oneself what one deems
appropriate. With this background of the American democratic tradition, the client-
centered therapy evolved more as a reaction to the existing models of therapy
which tended to underplay the client, his ability and his potentiality for a positive
life. Rogers (1942), by this contention, does not subscribe to the view that biological
orges and trappings determine all our activities.
However, sometimes the term 'client-centred' is somewhat misleading. All
therapies—the orthodox psychoanalytic and the more recent approaches—are
basically client-centered. The goal of all therapy is to help the clienL So the object
of every system of therapy is the betterment and well-being of the client. It is not
as if the other therapists are disinterested in the well-being of clients. Rogers uses
the term 'client-centred therapy' to emphasize the role the client has to play. In
psychoanalytic therapy, for example, the client has a passive role. The therapist is
at the centre of the stage. It is he who directs the course of the therapy, interprets
the client's communications and terminates the sessions. In the context of the
client-centred therapy, the therapist is not supposed to play the 'big brother' role.


--- PAGE 97 ---
Approaches to Counseling 77
He does not direct the course of therapy nor does he offer interpretations. The
client, in the client-centred approach, is always encouraged to rely on himself.
Rogers' (1961) theory of personality, more popularly known as the *seIf-theory'
of personality, has evolved from his counselling practice. It will be helpful if the
main features of his theory of personality are outlined before we explain the
counselling process. Rogers' theory basically views man as a "socialized, forward
moving, rational and realistic" individual. This contrasts with Freud's conception
of man as being irrational and unsocial. Man does not want to hurt himself or hurt
others (the death instinct). He wants to overcome such negative feelings. Human
nature is positive, constructive and cooperative. The individual perceives experience
as reality. He has an innate tendency towards actualizing his potentialities. The
child's behaviour is'goal-directed and is aimed at satisfying the ne^ for actualization
through interaction with his perceived reality (environment). The experiences are
valued as positive or negative in so far as they help or hinder his actualizing
tendency.
ROGERS'SELF'THEORY ^
The first few years of the client-centred approach, as practiced by Rogers, did not
have a well deHned theory. It was only after a considerable number of years that
he developed a set of theoredcal principles and this theory has been described as
self-theory in psychological circles. It synthesizes the important conceptions of
Snygg and Combs (1949), phenomenology and the organismic theory developed by
Goldstein (1939), Maslow (1954) and Angyal (1941). The theory also has some
important aspects adapted from Sullivan's (1953) 'inter-personal theory'.
'Self is the nuclear concept in Rogers' theory. It is conceived as something that
develops as a result of the interaction of the individual with his environment It may
introject the values of other people in either perceiving them correctly or in a
distorted manner. The self strives for consistency. The individual acts largely in a
way consistent with the self. Experiences which are not consistent with the self-
structure are perceived as threats. The self is not a static, unchanging entity. It may
change as a result of several factors, the most important of which are maturation
and learning (Hall and Lindzey, 1957).
Self concept, therefore, is the central construct of Rogers' theory. It may be
conceived of as an organized gestalt comprising:
1. The individual's perceptions of himself and the values attached to them.
2. The individual's perceptions of himself in relation to other persons and the
values attached to them.
3. The individual's perceptions of the various aspects of the environment and
the values attached to them.
Self cohcept is not self-awareness or consciousness. It is the conceptual gestalt
concerning oneself which need not always be in awareness, but available to
awareness. As the perceptions and the values attached to them change from time
to time, the self-concept is not a flxed or static thing. It is jalways in flux or in a


--- PAGE 98 ---
78 Counsellingcuid Guidance
state of change which is its most important characteristic. From the layman's point
of view the self-concept is the picture the individual has of himself and his evaluation
of this picture.
The importance of 'self as- a regulator of behaviour was recognized by
psychologists. Years of clinical observation of human behaviour has made it obvious
to psycho-therapists that one's attitude towards one's 'self is an important determiner
of one's behaviour. Therefore, changes in an individual's behaviour and attitudes
to others seem to follow changes in his attitudes towards himself. Needs are basically
determiners of behaviour. For example, the need for food when experienced as
hunger leads to activity on the part of an individual and he is satisfied on securing
the food by physical activity. However, the individual will not steal food to satisfy
his hunger, if he considers himself an honest person. The individual's behaviour
will thus normally be consistent with his self-concept, that is, his conception of
himself. The gratification of any need will have to be consistent with his self-
concept. However this is not always possible. When the urge to satTsfy a strong
need conflicts with his self-concept, the individual may adopt devious measures to
find gratification. The individual manoeuvres to keep his perception of his behaviour
consistent with his self-concepL Manoeuvring of perceptions to secure apparent
consistency leads to maladjustment.
The core concepts of Rogers' self-theory are:
1. The organism, which is the total individual.
2. The totality of experience which is the phenomenal field.
3. The self, which is a difierentiated part of the phenomenal field which
comprises the conscious perceptions of T and 'me' along with the values
attached to them.
The organism reacts as a whole to the totality of the situation or the phenomenal
field to secure satisfaction for its needs. The overriding basic motive or need is to
actualize, maintain and enhance itself. In this process, it symbolizes experiences
which become conscious, or it may ignore and deny symbolization of certain
experiences and prevent them from becoming conscious. Such experiences thiis
remain unconscious. Lack of congruence between experience and self-structure
leads to maladjustment.
Rogers postulated his theory of personality in a series of 19 propositions in his
book, Client-Centered Therapy (1951), which may be summarized as:
1. The individual exists in a constantly changing world of his own experience
of which he is the centre.
2. The individual's private world of experience (the intemal frame of reference)
can only be known in any genuine and complete sense to the individual
himself. Hence, the individual is the best source of information about himself.
The individual reacts to the field as it is perceived by him. The reality for
the individual is his own perceptual field. A knowledge of the stimulus
alone is not enough to predict the response. It is necessary to know how the
individual perceives the stimulus which explains why individuals react
differently to the same stimulus.
3. The individual reacts as a whole to the phenomenal field. The significance


--- PAGE 99 ---
Approaches to CounseHlng 79
of this is that the organism is always a total organized system and change
in any part could affect the whole.
4. The individual has the basic tendency to actualize, maintain and enhance
himself. This is called the undifferentiated ongoing tendency which is the
basis for self-actualizadon.
5. Behaviour is fundamentally goal-directed and it is the expression of the
individual who strives to satisfy the needs as they are perceived.
6. Feelings and emotions accompany goal-directed behaviour and facilitate the
expression of it Feelings and emotions are significant for the maintenance
and enhancement of the organism. Thus emotions are not disruptive (as
commonly believed) but are useful and beneficial. They have survival value
for the organism.
7. The best way of understanding the significance of any behaviour is from the
internal frame of reference of the individual himself.
8. The self is differentiated from the total phenomenal field.
9. The differentiadon of the self is the result of interacdon between the individual
and the environment. It is through tfiis interacdon that a consistent conceptual
pattern of percepdons, which is organized but fluid, emerges. It serves to
discriminate T' or 'me' from the values attached to the self which may have
been taken from others and perceived as if they are experienced directly.
This is introjectioR of values.
10. The values attached to experiences and self-structure taken from others may
be perceived in a distorted fashion. Conflict arises when the introjected
values are in disagreement with the genuine or true values. The self, in this
instance, will become a 'house divided*. The individual will feel as if he
does not really know what he wants. A soundly structured self is one in
which there is no distorUon of experience.
11. New experiences are encountered by the individual in his day-to-day life.
They are perceived and organized to bear some relationship to the self.
Occasionally some experiences are ignored because there is no perceived
relationship to the self-structure. Hence, such experiences are denied or
distorted because they are inconsistent with the structiuu of the self. This
implies tftat perception is selective in its basic nature.
12. The modes of behaviour adopted by the individual are those which are
consistent with the concept of the self. Hence, desirable changes in behaviour
can be brought about by altering the concept of the self. This is what is
essentially meant by the term client-centered or self-centered therapy in
which an attempt is made to effect alterations in the self structure of the
individual.
13. Behaviour is also caused by organic experiences and needs. Such behaviour
may be inconsistent with the structure of the self, in which case the behaviour
is not consciously accepted by the individual. Thus when an individual is
found to be not self-consistent he may explain away his inconsistency as
caused by some external compelling force. He does not accept the
responsibility for his action.
14. Psychological maladjustment is essentially the result of the individual's


--- PAGE 100 ---
80 CotinselUngand Guidance
refusal to become aware of significant experiences For example, there may
be a sensory or visceral experience but the individual does not recognize its
existence. This situation causes psychological tension.
15. Psychological adjustment obtains in a state in which the individual accepts
all the experiences and integrates them into his self-structure.
16. Any experience inconsistent with the structure of the self may be perceived
as a threat The perception of increased threat is bound to narrow down the
self-structure by denying the experiences posing this threat to the
consciousness. The individual becomes maladjusted.
17. Under certain facilitadng conditions, experiences which are inconsistent
with the individual self-structure and hence threats to it, may be perceived
and assimilated into the self-structure.
18. When the individual is dble to poceive and accept experiences hitherto
denied or distorted they are accepted and integrated into the self-structure,
dismissing thereby the cause for conflict.
19. When the individual is able to accept experiences without any distortion, he
is able to lead a healthy and integrated life.
The foregoing may be summed up as follows: The self theory is basically
phenomenological in nature and depends heavily on the self as an explanatoryconcept. The theory looks upon congruence between the phenomenal field of
experience and the conceptual structure of the self as essential to healthy adjusunent.
Absence of this congruence results in internal strain, anxiety and tension.
devuopment of sof-conceft
In the course of development, the child differentiates himself from the rest of his
environment so that a part of his experience is symbolized in his awareness as self-
experience. This leads to the concept of the self becoming defined through interaction
with others of significance in the environment. The child perceives experience as
'"selity. For him, his experiences are either satisfying or not satisfying. They are,
thCTefore, valued as positive or negative. The negatively valued experiences are
avoided while the positive ones are sought All such experiences are integrated into
the growing self-concept of the individual. The child desires regard from others.
The satisfaction of this need for regard depends upon his situation and other
individuals. The need for regard is reciprocal, that is, the positive regard of a
significant number of members can lead to a positive regard of one's self. The need
for self-regard develops from the experiences that grow out of association with
others. From the sense of self-regard develops a condition of self-worth. The need
for positive regard from others grows and develops into a need in itself. The need
for self-regard leads to the selective perception of experiences and thereby reality.
Experiences which are congruent and in accord with one's conditions of worth are
perceived and are integrated into awareness, while those incongruent or discordant
with one's conceptions of self-worth are distorted, that is, they are not perceived
as they 'are* but as they 'are desired to be'. The experiences thus get distorted and
are denied to awareness. They are not integrated and organized into the self-structure.


--- PAGE 101 ---
Approaches to Counselling 81
Thus alongside the self there develops what is known as the not-self. The incongruiQ^
between the self and not-self is between the self and the experience in dissonance
with it and leads to psychological maladjustment. The experiences which are
consistent with the self-concept are appropriately symbolized in awareness, while
other experiences which are not assimilat^ into the self-structure are distorted to
make them congruent with the self. Experiences which cannot be made congruent
with the self are eith^ not perceived or perceived as threatening. If this is symboUzed
in awareness, it introduces inconsistency. This state results in anxiety. Anxiety,
therefore, is the awareness of the inconsistency between the self and the perceptions
incongruent with it In a situation wherein the incongiuency between Ae self and
the experience becomes overwhelming the self is not able to cope with the situation,
that is, the individual is not able to function effectively. Anxiety is experienced to
the extent to which the self-structure is threatened. The personality tries to cope in
ways consistent with experiences that have been distorted or denied by defense
strategies. The result of these defenses is rigidity in perception or inaccurate
perception, of reality. The state of incongruency can be lessened by increasing the
congruence between experience and the 'self. For achieving an increase in
congruence the situation should permit a decrease of distortions leading to self-
denial and an increase in unconditional self-regard. A situatitm in which there is
complete absence of any threat to the self-structure of the client dances the
congruence of his self. If experiences that are inconsistent with the self are perceived
by the client his self is correspondingly restructured to assimilate such experiences
which could not have been entertained earlier. When the individual can perceive
and accept into his self in a consistent and integrated manner all his experiences,
he will naturally become more understanding of others.
In summary, Rogers' theory of personality, in contrast to the commonly held
conception that man is by nature an irrational, destructive and unsocial being, holds
that man is essentially rational, constructive and social. The theory can be presented
in five basic concepts.
1. Perception is an active process and individuals perceive by attaching meanings
to their experiences. What is perceived by the individual comprises reality
for him (internal frame of reference) and he responds to his experience as
a whole, as a total organism. He does not like direction or control imposed
on him in his relations with his experiential world. He craves fear autonomy
and is prepared to struggle towards self-management and self-regulation.
2. A part of the perceptual field is diiferentiated and is represented as an
awareness of an individual's own personality. This is what is called the self.
When other experiences and needs appear which are inconsistent with the
, self, they are disowned by the self. This process serves to presCTve and
enhance the self.
3. The need for self-regard may lead to selective perception or even to distortion
of experiences such that they are in accordance with one's feelings of self-
worth,
4. If incongruity exists between the self and experience, problems of adjustment
arise.
5. The individual is not ready to accept incongruity and modify his self. He


--- PAGE 102 ---
82 CounsellingandGuidance
perceives the incongruencies as threatening and, therefore, keeps them out
of his awareness. This situation causes anxiety. The outcome of this
unenviable situation is the loss of harmony and/or inc^acitation of the self.
The individual is no longa able to function as a 'fully-functioning self.
Rogers attaches enormous importance to the OHicept of a fully-functioning person.
A normal or healthy person who is not subject to any anxieties or maladjusunent
is able to live in a harmonious manner. This state of functioning of the individual
is called the fully-functioning self. According to Rogers, a fully-functioning self,
that is, a healthy individual will be open to new experiences. He will be able to live
a full life and will be self-dependent and self-directed as he will trust his own
capacities, Judgements and abilities to make choices without depending oii guidance
or assistance hrom other individuals. A fully-functioning self has a positive regard
for others as well as for oneself. In this slate the inherent tendency towards sclf-
actual^tion is ej^ressed without any hindrance and full advantage is taken of all
experiences. The individual, therefore, is open to experience and is in need of no
defuse (coping) mechanisms. He will not have to ^stort or deny experiences. He
is able to achieve maximum possible satisfaction and live with others in maximum
possible harmony.
Man has the capacity to experience in awareness, is capable of understanding
the factors iK^tisible for psychological maladjuslment and has the capacity tomove away froin tto, that is, he can move towards psychological adjustment.Psychotherapy, tn ttas context^ consists in enabling the Individ,^ u, move froma state of psychoiogtcal maladjustment to one of adjnstment by liberatinghtm ftotn hm setf^onstructcd dcflcencies towards a state of seif-actuaiization.
ti ^ Psychological adjustment and hasaU to poteuttabues and means for self-actualizaUon, ?he most important resultof Rogers' work was to establish a clinical nr 1 imponanicounselling; Psychotherapeuac approach to
the counsuung process/
From the above it wiU be seen that the eoal nf
approach is to make the individual a fuUv funLr " ® client-ccnte^and distorted part in his experience which ?
the region of the accepted experience tSatTSt T'"' "is the client's perception of the experience sinr» s? to this proce^change depends. The client's perceptions foUn«, h- ^ Iherapeuuc•i» -_j TT2« ^ ^ " wuuw flis nV
The counsellor, by unconditional acceptance ^ ^ feelings of ambivalence,try and modify his perceptions. For this to oc ^ explore andsecurity", acceptance and belonginpess. ^ feelings ofunconditional acceptance of the client, provides these by ^
and understanding. In this friendly and warm ft regard, warmth, interest
any hesitaUon or fear of criticism or ridicule n»ay, withoutonri self-examination leading to self-unri^rc. }? ® ^i"le self-exploration"n«erstandmg. in this process, several


--- PAGE 103 ---
Approaches to CounselUng 83
experiences distorted or rejected hitherto are experienced without any anxiety or
alarm. The client slowly and steadily progresses towards self-realization.
The three fundamental qualities that a counsellor should have, as emphasized by
Rogers, are: genuineness of feeling and interest, understanding, and unconditional
acceptance of the counsellee. The counsellor's interest in the counsellee cannot be
artificial. He is not to put on an act or merely do role-playing. His response has to
be genuine, warm and sympathetic. His understanding should not be confined to
mere intellectual or rational appreciation of what the counsellee says or does. It
involves reaching out with warmth and empathizing with the counsellee's situation.
EXPERfENONG OF RESPONSIBILITY vX
Once the client discovers that he is responsible for himself and his experiences,
various feelings may result, varying from unpleasant to pleasant No purpose is
served by distorting or rejecting an experience when one is responsible for it Thus"
the first step is to experience responsibility. As the counselling relationship becomes
stable the client freely explores his feelings and attitudes. He is now able to
experience both fear and positive interest towards his perceptions. Inconsistencies
and contradictions discovered in his self no longer upset or embarrass him. As the
process progresses as a result of exploration, negative attitudes are experienced and
perceived as freely as are the positive auitudes. When the client is able to experience
feelings and attitudes which were so far distorted he is no longer anxious about
experiencing these perceptions. The client thus reaches a stage at which he is ready
to reorganize his self.
essential CONDmONS FOR PERSONALITY CHANGE
According to Rogers (1957), the conditions necessaiy for a personality change to
take place are:
1. The counsellee and the counsellor are in psychological contact with each
other.
2. The counseUee is in a state of incongruence and hence is vulnerable and
anxious (vulnerabili^ is .the condition of the individual whose experience is
discordant with his self-structure and thus capable of creating tension and
psychological disorganization).
3. The counsellor is congruent and integrated, that is, he is free fix)m anxie^^
and tension. His relationship with the counsellee is genuine and does not
cause any disharmony in him.
4. The counsellor has unconditional positive regard for the counsellee. (TTie
counsellor does not have any reservations. He accepts the counsellee as he
is and does not impose any preconditions.)
5. The counsellor experiences an empathic understanding of the counsellee's
internal frame of reference and tries to communicate his experience to the


--- PAGE 104 ---
84 Counselling and Guidance
counsellee. (By internal frame of reference is meant the subjective world of
the individual which is available to himself and to none else.)
6. The counsellor exhibits empathy and warmth of acceptance of the counsellee
andhe (counsellee) appreciates and understands the counsellor's unconditional
positive regard towa^ him to a reasonable extent. (The client has some
understanding of the counsellor's position.)
Rogers (1961) describes the counselling process in seven steps or stages which
form a continuum.
^AGES IN THE COUNSELLING PROCESS
Stage I
1. There is an unwillingness to communicate about the self; communication,
if any, is only about exiemals, such as experiences which have no deep
significance for himself.
2. Feelings and meaningful personal experiences are neither recognized nor
accepted.
3. Client's personal constructs are extremely rigiii
4. Close and communicative relationships are often viewed as dangerous and
interpreted likewise.
5. The client does not recognize or perceive any problems.
6. Owing to blockage of internal communication (non-perception of
incongruence) there is no desire to change the experiential field.
7. Individuals at this stage do not recognize the need for counselling and do
not come voluntarily for help.
Stage II
1. In this stage the client begins to express his feelings about non-self objects.
The client may speak about other filings which are remote in relation to his
self.
2. Problems, if perceived, are looked upon as external to the self.
3. There is no sense of personal responsibility in problems.
4. Feelings may be exhibited or repressed as unrelated to himself and are not
owned.
5. Ways of experiencing generally follow past tendencies as distorted by the
self-structure acquired in the pasL
6. Client's personal constructs are rigid. Feelings may be shown but are not
recognized or owned. There is little differentiation of personal meanings
and recognition of contradictions.
Clients may begin therapy at this stage.
Stage III
1. The client feels free to express , his feelings. The process started in the
previous stage continues more freely.'Another significant improvement is
&


--- PAGE 105 ---
Approaches to Counselling 85
that the client talks about the self as an object. Past feelings and personal
feelings which are usually negative are expressed. However, the client does
not accept them. For most part, the feelings are revealed as something
shameful, bad or abnormal or unaccq}table in other ways. Certain experiences
are described as in the past or as somewhat remote from the self.
2. Personal constructs, though rigid, are recognized.
3. Differentiation of feelings and meanings is better and less general There is
some recognition of contradictions in experience.
4. The client is able to see his personal choices as ineffective but not in their
proper perspective.
Stage IV
1. The client describes more intense feelings experienced in the past and does
not refer to the feelings in. the present.
2. The client is able to overcome his defenses occasionally and express his
feelings as experienced in the present.
3. The tendency towards experiencing feelings in the immediate present is
dominant but there is distrust and fear of experiencing.
4. The client does not show open acceptance of feelings though occasionally
this is exhibited.
5. The client is able to express his experience as expeiienced in the present
and is less bound by the past self-structure and is less remote.
6. Acceptance, understanding and empathy enable the client to move smoothly
in the direction of therapy.
7. There is a realization about contradictions and incongruence between
experience and self.
8. The client shows feelings of self-responsibility in problems but there is a
tendency to vacillate.
9. The client is still wary about close relationships.
Stage V
1. Feelings are expressed freely in the present.
2. Feelings are very close to being fully experienced though fear, distnist and
lack of clarity are still present
3. Self-feelings are increasingly owned and accepted.
4. Responsibility for problems is accepted.
5. The client is increasingly able to accept contradictions and incongruencies
in experiences.
6. There is an increase in free dialogue within the self and improvement in
reducing blockage of internal communication.
Stage VI
1. The client who was previously inhibiting a feeling is able to experience the
same with immediacy and without any difficulty.
2. Feelings are freely experienced and expressed. The immediacy of


--- PAGE 106 ---
86 CounseUlngand Guidance
experiencing and the feeling which constitutes its content are accepted and
not denied, feared and/or struggled against In other words, negatives give
place to positives.
3. Self as an object tends to disq^pear.
4. The incongruence between experience and awareness is vividly experienced
as it disappears into congruence, that is, incongruence becomes congruence.
In this stage there are no longer any problems—external or internal.
Physiological concomitants of a loosening, relaxing nature—tears, sighs,
muscular relaxation, improved circulation, etc.—are present
Stage Vll
New feelings are experienced with immediacy and richness of detail. Changing
feelings are accepted and owned. There is a feeling of trust in the total organismic
process. All the elements of his experiences are now available to awareness and
there is experiencing of real and effective choice in new ways of being. The
counsellee becomes a 'fully-functioning person', by which is meant that each
individual has an innate tendency toward actualizing himself, that is, realizing his
inherent capacities and potentialities.
In brief the counselling process involves:
1. A loosening of feelings.
2. A change in the manner of experiencing.
3. A shift from incongruence to congruence.
4. A change in the manner and extent to which the individual is willing and
able to communicate himself in a receptive climate.
5. A widening of the cognitive maps of experience and a breaking of rigid
boundaries.
6. A change in the individual's manner of relating himself to others and to his
own experiences.
7. A change in the individual's reactions to his problems. .<>5^
The major shortcomings of client-centered therapy are:
1. This approach emphasizes the affective determinants of behaviour, ignoring
the importance of intellectual, cognitive and rational aspects of human nature.
2. It totally ignores the usefulness of providing information which may be of
value to the counsellees.
3. It has the same goal for all the clients, namely, maximizing, that is, making
them self-actualizing individuals. Hiis gener^ goal does not take into account
the individual needs of clients.
4. As a client-centered approach it claims to give freedom to the client to set
the goal, but more often than not, counselling goals emerge from the 'setting'
in which the counsellee and counsellor work.
5. It does not consider the category of individuals who accept little responsibility
for their problems.
6. In this aproach the counsellor is expected to be neutral and not communicate
his own values to the client. But in natural, inter-personal relations it is
difficult to conceive of neutral, value free and bland relations.


--- PAGE 107 ---
Approaches to Counselling 87
The positive contribudons of this approach are:
1. It successfully drives home the point that the coiinsellee rather than the
counsellor is the centre or focus of the counselling process, that is, it is for
the counsellee to take the inidative and overcome his problems.
2. It emphasizes the importance of the counselling reladonship in facilitating
personality change.
3. It stresses the importance of the counsellor's attitudes rather than his
techniques in effecting the counselling relaUonships.
4. It emphasizes the importance of the affecdve domain in the counselling
process and holds that counselling should concern itself with emodons and
feelings.
BEHAVIOURISnC APPROACH TO COUNSELLING
(counselling and psychotherapy are concerned with behaviour change and, therefore,
according to some theorists, must involve the applicadons of the principles of
learning or learning theory. Learning here is understood as changes in behaviour
which are relatively long lasting and which are not diie to maturation or to
physiological factors like fatigue, effect of drugs, etc. However, counselling, by and
large, has developed outside the learning theory. It is only in recent times that the
principles of learning theory have been sought to be applied in the counselling
technique.
The learning approach employed in the behaviouristic model could be either the
classical conditioning or the operani conditioning model. While it is not necessary
to go into the details of conditioning, it is essential that the basic principles be
grasped. From the behaviouristic point of view, all behaviour—adjustive or
maladjustive—is primarily learnt in the same manner. Hence it should be modifiable
by employing suitable learning principles. All behaviour of organisms, including
human beings, ranging from simple to complex behaviour, is learnt. Four basic
principles (DCRR) are involved in all types of learning. The first is drive or
motivation which impels the organism to act. The drives could be primary (tissue
needs) or'secondary (learnt). Without drive there can be no action; consequently,
no learning can occur. The second principle is cue or stimulus. For instance, an
organism is hungry and is stimulated by a variety of different objects, including
food. The stimulation by food would be elective while the other stimulations in
this situation would not be effective. Thus, drive and cue together determine the
response of the organism. The third principle of all learning is response. Stimulation
leads to responses. The relevance of a response to a situation at a given time is
determined by its survival value or its serviceability or usefulness to the organism.
For example, the ringing of a bell elicits different responses like the turning of the
head in the direction of the sound, the pricking of ears, salivation, and so on.
Among these, salivatioit is the relevant response because it has survival value. If
there is danger, then running or flight would be the relevant response. Usually the
relevant responses are reinforced. Reinforcement is the fourth principle of learning.


--- PAGE 108 ---
88 Counsdllng and Guidance
It is of the nature of a reward. A response that is reinforced or rewarded is acquired,
wt^e a response that is not rewarded is not acquired^{^e behaviouristic approach to counselling employs the four principles of learning,
namely, drive, cue, response and reinforcement. Every response is considered
modifiable by the use of an appropriate system of reinforcemenL The behavioiuistic
approach differs from the psychoanalytic and medical approaches with regard to its
attitude towards maladaptive or maladjusted behaviour. In psychoanalysis or clinical
approaches the concern is with the past, that is, as to how a particular symptom or
syndrome tias been caused. The therapist delves deep into the life history or case
history of the client to identify the causes. The dispelling of these causes is expected
to rid the client of the undesirable symptom(s). In sharp contrast to this view, the
behaviour therapist is least concerned with the past He is not interested in knowing
what caused the symptom. He is concerned with the symptom here and now. The
past for him is something which cannot be changed. It is irrelevant. But the future
can be modified. Past, however, is not existent and, therefore, unmodifiable.
Therefore, the behaviour therapist is not concerned with the case history and the
past There is no need for delving into the past life history of the client It serves
no real purpose. Therapy essentially consists of several simple steps: (1) identifying
the undesirable, unwanted, maladjusted and maladaptive behaviour, (2) careful
analysis of the maladaptive behaviour into small units, and (3) each unit is eliminated
by an appropriate technique involving an operant conditioning procedure. There are
different approxhes stressing different aspects of the learning theory.\
Dollard and Miller's (1950) reinforcement theory is a thought provoking approach.
They define neurosis as learned behaviour. What is more interesting is that, xcording
to them, neurotic conflicts are taught by parents and learnt by children. Thus,
unwanted and maladjusted behaviour is acquired or learnt This includes phobias,
compulsions, hysterical symptoms, regression, reaction formation, alcoholism, etc.
In the long run many behavioural reactions become maladaptive. They comprise
the techniques by which the responsibility for action is evaded. They increase the
misery though in the beginning the results appear favourable. In the treatment of
clients therapy involves the creation of a new type of social situation which is the
opposite of that responsible for inducing repression. The new social situation provides
for gradually overcoming the repressions under permissive social conditions. The
therapeutic situation is characterized by permissiveness which leads to the removal
of repression. Rogers (1951) underlines the importance of the permissiveness of the
counselling situation. The therapeutic process is a slow and difficult one because
fear and anxiety xcompany the repressed ideas and even though the therapist is
permissive and neutral, the client cannot help experiencing these unpleasant emotions.
The clients are encouraged to verbalize their experiences, that is, talk about
themselves and in this process the client gives vent to his emotions. In psychodrama
a similar principle is employed. Much of our learning makes use of labels. This is,
based on principles of generalization and transference. The fear of one object, by
association, leads us to fear several other objects. We label them all as dangerous
so that even a neutral object may arouse anxiety and fear owing to generalization.
In therapy this principle of labelling is used to overcome a client's own fears by
learning to label appropriately. Effective learning involves making proper choices.


--- PAGE 109 ---
Approaches to CounseJIIrjg 99
If an individual were lo wrongly identify and choose objects, he would perhaps
encounter unpleasant experiences. Labelling as a technique is used by the therapist
to help the client acquire certain desirable behavioural tendencies or eliminate
undesirable behavioural tendencies.
^In the implementation of therapy the client is provided with a permissive social
environment where he is free to talk and express his feelings no matter how shocking
or horrifying they may be. The therapist obtains relevant information from such
talk. Gaps are filled by suitable questioning. In this process, the client starts with
relatively unimportant material and progresses to express more stressful and
emotionally-upsetting material. The therapist suitably rewards the free expression
or free-association (talking) of the client The simplest rewarding technique is to
give exclusive attention to what the client is saying. The second kind of reward is
to accept what the client says without condemning him or giving critical comments.
A third reward is to recount to llie client what he has mentioned earlier. Yet another
type of reward is not to cross-examine the client.
The next step in therapy consists in the handling of transference. Through this
the therapist gains information about the client. He has to identify the transferred-
responses and clarify them by questioning and identifying the origin and the person
from whom it is transferred. Transferred responses are learned responses. They can,
therefore, be modified and even unlearned.
The reinforcement theory of Dollard and Miller (1950) is an integration of
psychoanalytic concepts with behaviourisdc techniques. Since the two belong to
endrely different domains, there are bound to be some gaps and inconsistencies.
But the approach has been very useful in stimuladng other thinkers and therapists
to explore the use of the learning approach in counselling^
RECIPROCAL INtOBinON TCCHNIQ.UE
In the reciprocal inhibidon technique, Wolpe (1964) tries to free himself from
psychoanalydc concepts and move towards the behaviourisdc approach. According
to him, all behaviour conforms to causal laws. Changes in the behaviour of any
organism are caused by (1) growth (maturadon), (2) lesions (injury, damage and
disease) and (3) learning. Here we are concerned with those changes in behaviour
which are caused by learning. According to Wolpe, learning is assumed to have
occurred "if a response has been evoked in temporal condguity with a given sensory
sdmulus and it is subsequenUy found that the stimulus can evoke the response
although it could not have done so before". If the sdmulus earlier evoked the
response but subsequently evokes it more strongly, then, too, learning may be said
to have occurred. The strengthening of the relation between the stimulus and the
response is called reinforcement. Reinforcement is strengthened by several factors,
such as an optimal interval between the unconditioned and conditioned stimulus,
the interval between the response and the reinforcement and the nature of
reinforcement When a conditioned stimulus is repeatedly presented without
reinforcement the conditioned response disappears. Sometimes the conditioned
response does not appear for reasons such as fatigue, dissipation of energy, etc.


--- PAGE 110 ---
90 Counsdilngand Guidance
Wolpe is a protagonist of reciproca] inhibition as a therapeutic device. According
to him, reciprocal inhibition eliminates or weakens an old response by the substitution
of new ones. "When a response is inhibited by an incompatible response and if a
major drive reduction follows a significant amount of conditioned inhibition of the
response will be developed." The technique as initiated by Wolpe is quite simple
and in therapy this process follows from the basic assumption, namely, that neurotic
behaviour is a learned behaviour. It is a persistent habit of unadaptive behaviour
acquired by learning in a physiologically normal organism. Anxiety is the important
constituent of maladaptive bdtaviour. Anxiety is unpleasant and may often interfere
with performance. The unlearned anxiety or fear is a normal response to dangerous
stimuli. Neurotic anxiety is evoked by harmless stimuli as a result of conditioning.
Anxiety is the central component of most neuroses. Free-floating anxiety is evoked
by a number of stimuli in the environment such that there is no clearly defined
stimulus. In reciprocal inhibition the client is helped to overcome anxiety by inhibiting
it. The therapy is essendally a conditioning therapy and is of three types:
1. Counter-conditioning—^The principle involved is that a response inhibitory
of anxiety can be made to occur in the presence of anxiety-evoking stimuli.
It will weaken the bond between these stimuli and the anxiety (Wolpe). In
this technique, anxiety is eliminated by a competing response by means of
a reciprocal inhibition. This principle is also the basis for aversive therapy.
2. Positive reconditioning—^This is a technique of establishing new behaviour
patterns. Operant conditioning principles are employed such that a response
is rewarded every time it is omitted and a response which is sought to be
eliminated is not rewarded every time it appears.
3. Experimental extinction—This procedure consists of continued non-
reinforcement of a habit such that it is progressively weakened and disappears.
Wolpe has suggested the implementation of a type of therapy which involves
(1) systematic relaxation, (2) systematic desensitization and (3) assertive
training.
Systematic relaxation—^The client is asked to practice relaxing his body muscles.
Some.ldnd of training is given to the clients in learning to relax the muscles. Mental
relaxation in addition to muscular relaxation is also obtained through respiratory
refuses which comprise simple breathing exercises. Anxiety-ridden clients are
helped by letting them inhale a mixture of carbon dioxide and oxygen. Not more
than foiu' such inhalations are permitted in a single session.
Systematic desensitizadon—^The client is assisted to prepare a list of stimulus
siUiations starting with the least anxiety-evoking to the most intensely anxiety-
evoking stimulus situation. The client is then asked to read the items in a hierarchical
order. Clients go through the items in different sessions one by one till they get
adapted to each one of them without expaiencing the least amount of anxiety. If
the case warrants, the client of either sex is encouraged to think of sexual responses
without experiencing any anxiety.
Assertive training—This involves leaming to make assertive responses. These
assertive responses enable the overcoming of anxieties arising out of inter-personal
relationships. This technique is similar to psychodiama.


--- PAGE 111 ---
Approaches to Counselling 91
BEHAVIOURAL MODIHCATION
Behavioural modification is a technique or group of techniques that employ the
learning theory. As far as behavioural counsellors are concerned, behaviour results
from the interaction of heredity and environment Behavioural counsellors are usually
concemed with observable behaviour, though implicit behaviour is as much a result
of the interaction of heredity and environment. They stress five tenets:
1. Most, if not all, human behaviour is learnt (excluding maturation). Hence
it is changeable or modifiable.
2. Changes in the environment can alter behaviour. Counselling therapists seek
to bring about relevant changes in client behaviour by altering the
environment suitably.
3. Social learning principles are of value in efiecting behavioural change. The
common social learning principles employed are social reinforcement,
modelling, labelling, etc.
4. The counselling effectiveness can be assessed in terms of actual outcomes
in behavioural change.
5. The counselling technique or procedure cannot be a predetermined fixed
process. It has to be designed to suit each client's specific needs.
The most important central principle of behavioural counselling is reinforcement.
Reinforcement could be positive, negative or neutral. Behavioural change is alierapted
to be brought about by first identifying the behaviour to be changed and defining
the objective (nature of change sought).
The principles of reward (R), aversion (A), omission (0) and punishment (P) or
RAOP are employed either individually or in combination as required in specific
cases. If the client makes a response which is in the desired direction, it is positively
reinforced. The client may also be shown a model and the behaviour of the client
is sought to be modelled by suitable reinforcement. For instance, if smoking is to
be eliminated, every time the client makes a response in the direction of smoking,
such as reaching for the cigarette case or taking a cigarette, an aversive reinforcement
is given. A common aversive technique used in overcoming alcoholism is that
when the client consumes alcohol he immediately feels sick and vomits. Thus
consumption of alcohol is associated with aversive vomiting behaviour. Another
technique to eliminate a behaviour is to ignore iL No reinforcement is given in this
technique. This corresponds to deconditioning or extinction. Punishment is
administered as a negative reinforcement whenever quick results are sought But
punishment by itself may not be useful because it may harden the organism, that
is, the client may develop negative adaptation. Behavioural counselling has a very
significant application in schools and early childhood behaviour. Whether it would
be useful with adults, and if useful, what the permanency of such a change would
be, are questions which have not been satisfactorily answered.
Criticisms of behavioural counselling generally stress the meaninglessness of
the mechanistic view of human behaviour. It is also questioned as to whether the
manipulation of client behaviour in a cold, impersonal fashion is justifiable. The
major criticism appears to centre round the issues of the infringement of human
freedom and choice.


--- PAGE 112 ---
92 Counselllngand Guidance
The principles of cybernetics are also sought to be employed in the field of
counselling. Phillips and Winer (1966) have explained that individuals acquire a
chain of reactions in which each reacdon serves as a feed-back to the individual.
If the outcomes are positive, that is, desirable and satisfying they form an amplifying
positive loop. The undesirable or dissatisfying reacdon chain forms into a negative
counteracting loop. The therapist has to introduce a 'change plan' and implement
it padently to break the hold of the self-defeadng counteracdng negadve loops on
the behaviour of the counsellee. For instance, a highly modvated student offers a
challenging course and obtains high grades; he is sadsfied and his self-confidence
is boosted. This modvates him further and he moves forward. Another student may
offer similar courses and spend more dme and energy to secure good grades and
this need of spending more time makes him feel Ixired and his efficiency may
suffer as a consequence. He may obtain low grades and this outcome may create
a sense of dlssadsfacdon in him and he may avoid taking challenging courses ever
afterwards. The diagram below illustrates the amplifying positive loops and
counteracdng negadve loops:
(E)
Feels boredom
Less efhden^
In study
(A)
(F)
Low grades
obtained
(G)
(B) I
More work Is done
More time Is spent
in study
Offers challenging
courses
Obtains high
grades>
Gets confidence
Prepares to try
harder
(D)
satisfaction
A, B, C and D form a posidve amplifying loop in which one response acts as
a posidve feed-back to the preceding one. Response series A, E, F and G, in
contrast, is a negadve counteracdng loop. In this the student's dlssadsfacdon has
an undesirable feed-back effect upon his taking challenging courses of study. He
tries to avoid or change them at the earliest, otherwise he may fail miserably.
THE EXISTENTIAL POINT OF VIEW
Existential thinking approaches the quesdon of understanding man's 'being', i.e.,
man as he 'really is' in the spirit of St Augustine's quesdon: 'Who am I?' rather
than with the sciendfic understanding of a human being following the Aristotelian
quesdon: 'What is the place of man in nature?' Existentialism developed as a
reacdon to the menacing growth of materialism. Human life was fast becoming
mechanical, losing its freedom and ability for self-transcendence. Philosophers from
ancient times have been striving to find fte meaning of human existence, glorifying
rationalism as an unfailing guide. However, all attempts to gain insight into human


--- PAGE 113 ---
Approaches to Counselllr^g 93
nature and existence proved shallow. Existentialism developed as a powerful
movement and as a reaction to excessive rationalism in war-ravaged Europe. Human
life in the post-war Europe was becoming meaninglessly compartmentalized.
'Humanness' seemed to be getting lost Rigid compartmentalization resulted in
business devoid of ethics and daily life estranged from religion. All irrational
activity or behaviour was described as evil and undesirable. Reason came to be
increasingly emphasized at the cost of feeling and experience. It was claimed that
reason helped man act objectively instead of emotionally. Brushing aside the
interfering emotions, it was argued, helps man act rationally. Such compartmentalized
individuals with will divorced from reason did not fit well into the fast developing
industrial society. Individuals devoid of will were either manipulated like machines
or they manipulated themselves. Thus human beings came to be viewed as marketable
commodities and market conditions determined the value of human existence. In
this situation, men surrendered their self-awareness to insulate themselves as
necessary protection against reality and paid the price dearly—in terms of anxiety,
compulsions and despair. This unenviable predicament of human life loomed large
in the post-war technological world. The true predicament was, in reality, that
human beings lost the love and confidence in one another, and perhaps the will to
be human.
In the last hundred odd years there has been an undesirable change in peoples
attitudes to religion and religious values. This is due to the rise of movements such
as liberalism, enlightenment and social revolution that led to the serious erosion, if
not breakdown, of religious traditions in the name of scientific rationalism. Religion
lost relevance for the young, the old, the educated and the uneducated, all alike.
Against this background, the existential movement was started as a corrective measure
revolting against excessive rationalism. It substantially affected contemporary
thought. However, in USA owing to the influence of British empiricism, the impact
and import of existentialism was not appreciated for a long time. The hold of
empiricism was further accentuated by the rise of positivism, behaviourism,
operationism and associationism. There was apparently no enthusiasm to grapple
with the concept of 'being' and it was dismissed as a puerile and distant abstraction.
However, the writings of Angyal, Lecky, Goldstein, Rogers and Maslow emphasized
varying degrees of self-actualization. Though they were not existential thinkers,
they stressed the basic motive of life, namely, maintaining and actualizing the self.
Scientific advances which apparently led to mastery of power over nature could not
help understanding man's being. There was growing despair resulting from the split
between subject and object which not only resulted in man's estrangement from
nature but also to his estrangement from himself. Oriental thought has approached
this issue with greater success. The question, 'What does it mean to be human?'
cannot be answered in terms of any materialistic science. Ancient oriental thinkers
were of the opinion, as Lao Tze in the Way of Life states, that 'existence is beyond
the power of words to define'. Existence is infinite.
In spite of the several changes that have resulted from scientific and-technological
advances, the way 'to do' and 'to be' remained enigmatic. There was evidently a
lack of direction, causing deep concern in all sections of society. The assumption
that success in other realms owing to scientific reasoning will unravel the inner


--- PAGE 114 ---
94 Counselllngand Guidance
world which characterizes man's existence turned out to be hollow. This is umwelt
which is the world around. We all live at the same time in the world and have
interpersonal relations which differ from one individual .to another. This world of
personal and interpersonal relationships is the mitwelt, a world within. We live with
this world. Further, we live in a third world, the intimate personal world, which is
not adequately understood. This is the eigenwelt. It induces self-awareness, self-
relatedness and self-transcendence, possessed only by human beings. While attention
has been paid to the unwell and the mitwelt, the eigenwelt remains enigmatic. It
comprises the unique personal experiences. For example, one may say: Tt is a
beautiful sunset*. This statement is empty and carries no significance unless it is
related to one's experience. Thus while it is a beautiful sunset for one, it may not
be so for another. Any attempt to objectify and look for an index of truthfulness
is futile. An experience irrelevant and meaningless to one may be immediate,
concrete and real for another.
In existential counselling, we are concerned with the eigenwelt. The basic concepts
arising from this for existential counselling are:
1. To 'know the counsellee is to relate to him in his totality, to grasp his
being'. This is not the same as knowing him. All psychological test data,
however valuable and comprehensive, do not help one learn of him. It only
'tells' about him. Therefore, it is not knowing the other person as a person.
2. The sense of being is real. A thing of experience cannot be reduced to
quantification in scientific terminology. The experience of 'being' can be
grasped only through experience. A number of measures that are carefully
and painfully gathered do not help comprehend the 'being'. 'Being' is not
static. It cannot be measured at one time and dealt with later. 'Being' is
'becoming'. Therefore, what was good yesterday may not be good either
today or tomorrow. A human being has the unique capacity to be aware of
himself and be responsible for himself. He can also become aware of 'non-
being*. His choices and actions determine his 'being' and 'non-being'. Each
time he chooses he also rejects. 'Being' and 'non-being' invariably follow
one's affirmation, i.e., choice. The counsellor in his relationship can help
create the conditions in which the counsellee feels accepted. This feeling of
acceptance implies trust If there is unconditional acceptance it enables a
person to experience his own 'being*.
3. To contemporary man, modem life is' a picture of complete cultural
disintegration. This is especially true of the younger generation. Contemporary
life is characterized by four feelings: fear, uncertainty, loneliness and
meaninglessness.
4. Existentialism tries to re-establish the possibility of meaning. For this it
holds that man is related to his world. An individual and the world must be
understood as one. When we think of an individual in his home, or in his
office, we mistakenly think of the spatial relationship, but much more than
this is implied. The basic theme is that it is necessary for counsellors to
assume that they cannot arrive at an adequate understanding of the
counsellee's behaviour from a study of environment alone. Each one lives
in his own world which may be similar to others but also uniquely different.


--- PAGE 115 ---
Approaches to CounseHlng 9S
'World* and 'being in ihe world' have a specific meaning for existendalists.
The world comprises an individual's unique structure of meaningful
relationships in which he participates. The counsellor should know the
counsellee's environment. But this is possible only when the meaning of the
environment of the counsell^ is understood.
The counsellee's world consists of experiences of past events and a variety
of external influences, but their meaning derives fiom how he relates to
them. The counsellee is continuously using what he selects fiom the world
of intimate personal experiences, shaping, forming and building it into his
relations with them. Self-awareness is an ongoing process which is open to
all experiences. This openness is not identifiable with culture.
5. Ego and being are different. Counsellors unwittingly confuse the function
of the ego with 'authentic being'. Ego is traditionally conceived as a passive
agent derived from modifications imposed upon it from the external world;
and it represents the external world, i.e., the ego is a reflection of the outside
world. Its strength and weakness depend upon the approval/disapproval of
people and forces outside the person. In this subject, object ^chotomy,
'ego' is the subject, but 'being' is prior to this dichotomy. It is in one's own
experience of existence. It is not derived from the outside forces. The sense
of being is knowing that I am the one who initiates what is occurring. One's
knowing includes one's capacity to be so. Lack of understanding 'being'
misleads counsellors into viewing adjustment as a goal of counselling.
Therefore, they assume that ego is primary and acceptable satisfaction of
ego demands the end result. This view assumes the individual to be the
passive recipient of forces upon him.
6. Fact of 'non-being'. It is easy to think of life in terms of 'being' and
'becoming'. Yet all these things come to an end. 'Non-being' is the end. It
is real. Every new experience threatens our-being. We can choose to escape
this 'denial' through rationalization and thus deny 'being* within us. We do
not consciously create being. It takes place incidentally as we choose to
pursue it in the future. 'Being' and 'non-being' are the opposite poles of
existence. One cannot and does not have meaning without the other.
7. Ontological perspective of anxiety. Most counsellors deal with anxie^ that
is common, namely 'normal* anxiety, which arises from a real fear of
helplessness, frt addition to normal anxiety, there is 'neurotic anxiety' arising
out of fear of something that is vague and ambiguous. It is not a concrete
thing or object or event and the consequent feeling of helplessness gives rise
to neurotic anxiety. Another type is called 'existential anxiety. Existentialists
call it urangsi which underlies the feeling that in the ultimate sense we are
finite, helpless and doomed to meet our end some day. This does not imply
hostility or provoke inner conflict leading to neurotic defensive measures.
We can escape this anxie^ by detachment and conformity. The counsellee
in this situation does not escape the threat of anxiety and emptiness. The
counsellor is not engaged to free the counsellee from anxiety. He sees
anxiety as an opportunity for growth. So he is interested in helping the
counsellee to accept anxiety as a constituent of life.


--- PAGE 116 ---
96 Counselllns^d Guidance
8. Ontological perception of guilt. One feels 'functional guilt' when one behaves
in a manner unacceptable to society. For example, lifting small articles from
a shop results in functional guilt owing to cultural factors. This may also be
called 'societal guilt'. Another is 'ontological guilt' which originates in
one's own world. It differs from other forms of guilt as its source is not
culture or introjection of authority figures. It is also different from neurotic
guilt
BASC ASSUMFnONS OF EXISTENTIAL COUNSELLING
Existential counselling is a radically diHercnt approach to the counsellee and
counselling. The basic principles are:
(i) Technique follows understanding. It is commonly believed that the simple
can be understood only in terms of the complex. This is not true in existential
counselling. This approach places emphasis on the context in which counselling
occurs. The counsellee is not viewed as an object. He is seen as a person who is
choosing, committing and orienting himself toward something out of the present.
(ii) In order to obtain a more realistic image of man and his potential we have
to revise our current theories of learning which are inadequate and can best explain
animal learning and perhaps, to some extent, learning in young children. The theories
of growth have stressed physical maturation to the neglect of psychological
development. Allport stresses the importance of functional autonomy in place of
firmly structured personality. Human nature is explained by most theories as a
quasi-closed system shaped by past factors. Mercifully, human personality is a
wide-open system, oriented to the future which is responsive to tangible and
intangible cultural forces.
Existential psychological counselling has its ori^ in early philosophical thinking.
It may be traced to the ideas that preceded Freud's psychoanalytical theory. The
existential view is a complex one arising from theology, literature, philosophy,
psychology, psychiatry and other such areas of human interest. The basic theme is
concerned with the understanding of human nature in general and human behaviour
and emotions in particular. Existential therapists hold that man is more than 'an
intellect' and that counselling should, therefore, be psychological rather than logical.
Existential philosophy is concerned with the nature of man. The individual is not
a mere substance or mechanism, but is becoming or emerging. The proponents of
the existential view are fix)m outside the psychological stream of thought. The
father figure of this movement is Soren A. Kierkegaard (1813-1855). Among the
other thinkers are Paul Tillich (1886-1965), Martin Heidegger (1889), Jean Paul
Sartre (1905-1980), Eugene Minkowski 0). 1885), Ludwig Binswanger (b. 1881),
Roilo May (b. 19(^) and Viktor E. Frankl (b. 1906). Most of the thinkers are
literary figures and who have not distinguished themselves either as psychologists
or psychiatrists. The last two, namely. May and Frankl have contributed to
psychotherapy and counselling.
Existentialism centres around the concepts of 'being' and 'non-being'. Man is


--- PAGE 117 ---
Approaches to Counselling 97
deeply concerned with the question of defining himself. Both in the East as well
as in the West, philosophers from time immemorial have stressed the importance
of the dictum, 'know thy self. What is man? Man is what he makes of himself. He
has perfect freedom to fashion himself in any way he likes'. But after having made
a choice he is responsible for the consequences. He cannot disown them. But man
tries to evade responsibility. To accept responsibility is extremely painful. The
existentialists use the word 'dread' to signify man's reaction to his responsibility.
Because of his dread he tries to evade responsibility and in the bargain forfeits his
freedom. This awareness causes anguish. This is man's existential predicament We
want to be free but we are a&aid of responsibility. So we avoid the responsibili^
and, therefore, we become unhappy.
The existential conception of man is simple yet all-encompassing. The view
of man is stated in a set of the foUowing propositions: (1) Every man who
is mentally not incompetent is responsible for his actions. (2) Man can do little
to change the physical universe. It is better for him to face reality and learn to
live with it. (3) Man is alone in this world. Therefore he must aim at making
his fellow beings happy. (4) Man creates his own world, that is, his own natiue
by his own free choice. Man should act towards others as he would want them
to act towards himself. When making decisions man first asks—What will
their effects be on humanity? He must treat human beings with dignity just as
he believes himself to have dignity. Man is not just a physical entity existing
in a physical universe which functions on the principle of determinism. This
principle of determinism does not apply to human beings as their essential
nature is freedom. To be firee means to be responsible to oneself for one's own
actions. Man needs counselling help because no man in this world can solve
ell his problems alone. Counselling helps man to understand himself in his proper
perspective as a human being. Existential thinking places enormous emphasis on
the concept of freedom. It sees man not as 'being' but as 'becoming'. A free man
has limitless opportunities not only to make a free culture but also to transcend it
Concept of anxiety and guilt—Tliere is an opposition between 'being' and 'non-
being' such as between life and death. This is the existential anxiety which grows
out of man's concern for himself. The second kind of anxiety is called normal
anxiety which we experience when we feel helpless in a specific situation. It is
natural for every one to experience existential anxiety and normal anxiety, unlike
neurotic anxiety which stems from deeper maladjustments. It is man's inability to
act responsibly chat leads him to experience guilL In existential counselling the
client is helped to gain knowledge and insight into his situation, that is, he experiences
a sense of commitment. When a client is able to determine the implications of his
commitment he will be prepared to take responsibility for actions that have emanated
from his own choice and £ree will.
The existential point of view has rightly focussed on the basic conflict of human
nature, the kind of ambivalence that results in inaction or renunciation of freedom.
In practice, existential counselling does not appear to ^ply to the common conflicting
problems of human beings.


--- PAGE 118 ---
96 CounselUijgand Guidance
THE MINNESOTA POINT OF VIEW
The irait-and-fxtor ^proach has developed fiom the vocational guidance movement
which advocated guidance for educational and vocational adjustment TTiis movement
was started by the pioneering efforts of people like Hi Weaver who wrote Choosing
a Career in 1907, Frank Parsons who started the Vocational Bureau of Boston in
1908, Jesse B. Davis (1898) who started Educational Career Counselling in Detroit
and William Rainey Harper of University of Chicago who stressed the importance
of guidance in 1899, a decade before Frank Parsons. Donald Patersoii and his
colleagues continued this work at the University of Minnesota. This blossomed into
a school of thought in the woric of Williamson, Berdie and others who did a great
deal of work at the Student Counselling Bureau, University of Minnesota. The
directive point of view has developed with the recognition of and the concern for
problems not necessarily restricted to educational and vocational areas. However,
the important point of distinction is that the Minnesota school does not consider
psychotherapy to be the same as counselling. To quote Williamson (1950),
"Psychotherapy in the past has centered attention ^ost exclusively and somewhat
narrowly upon the pathology and medical treatment of emotional disruptions, traumas
and anxieties". Williamson emphasizes the developing nature of counselling. There
is an element of change in the development Hence, Williamson has never claimed
to have stated the principles of directive counselling in their fmal form.
One of the foremost tenets of counselling, according to the directive approach,
is that the goals of counselling and education are the same. This view is called
'personalism*. The function of counselling is to enable the student to profit optimally
firom instruction. Psychotherapy has often restricted itself to the emotional aspects
of personality development. Counselling, on the other hand, has a much broader
scope. It is concerned with the interaction of the personaliQ^ with the surrounding
culture. Thus counselling is not psychotherapy but a different concept which embraces
and integrates vocational and ^ucational guidance with personality dynamics and
inter-personal relationships.
The directive approach explains the nature of man in terms of five propositions:
1. Human nature is always capable of accomplishment, often through education.
Therefore, coimsellors must help the counsellees learn to utilize their abilities
most efficiently.
2. The second proposition concerns human development Though man has the
potentiality for fiiU development, he often does not thieve this. Self-
actualization requires the assistance of other people. Williamson (1965)
emphasizes Herberg's statement "the human self emerges only in the
community and has no real existence apart from it"
3. There is the question of 'what is good?" This has been a problem through
the ages and this question cannot be answered with finaliQ^. Self-actualization
is thus the best possible and the most 'good' form of human nature.
4. Who determines what is good? There is once again much controversy
regarding this and what appears apt is that the search for self actualization
itself will prove to be a good life.
5. What is the natiue of the universe and what is man's relationship to the


--- PAGE 119 ---
Approaches to Counselling 99
universe? The counsellor has to help the counsellee formulate the best
conception of his personal cosmology.
The acrimony between the directive and non-directive counselling theories has
mercifully subsided. The orthodoxies of the 1950s have apparently run their course.
As counselling sought recognition as a profession, the question of explaining the
functions and describing the procedures elicited vague answers which were not
quite convincing. Non-directive counselling theory became too broad and led to the
emphasis of therapy at the expense of counselling. So long as counselling and
therapy were not distinguished, any distinction was thought irrelevant Non-directive
theory was apparently in the leading position, but this led to blurring the distinction
between counselling as an educative agent and counselling as a therapeutic agent.
Client-centred counselling therapy attempted to become the definition of guidance
theory. The directive model assumed that the counsellor possessed information,
content and facts that he provided to his clients. An informational deficit was, in
reality, a problem which could be quickly and effectively solved. The concept of
guidance is superficial if imparting of information is a major objective of guidance.
It is as disjunctive to the gods of guidance as is the classroom teacher who functions
merely as a presenter of content This implies the avoidance of a major educational
goal—the process of disciplined enquiry in the classroom and the process of learning
to be able to make one's own decisions as in the case of counselling. These two
aspects of the process of education become the major educational goals once the
complementary roles of teaching and guidance are recognized. From the point of
view of teaching this would mean the growth of individual autonomy in the use of
ideas, facts, questions and content in the various subject disciplines.
NATURE OF COUNSEUING
Counselling, according to Williamson (1950), is "one of the personalized and
individual processes designed to aid the individual to learn school subject matter,
citizenship traits, social and personal values and habits, and all other habits, skills,
attitudes and beliefs which go to make up a normally adjusting being." In other
words, the function of counselling is to assist the counsellee at school or college
to learn effective ways of achieving desired and desirable goals. Counselling is thus
personalized, permissive assistance to develop self-understanding and self-direction.
The directive approach is also called the trait-and-factor approach by which is
meant that the counselling process consists of analysing and identifying personality
traits or factors which could best be matched with the demands of different kinds
of situations—educational, vocational, personal, etc. The counselling process consists
of six steps—analysis, synthesis, diagnosis, prognosis, counselling and follow-up
(ASDPC^. In this approach there is a strong analogy to the medical model. The
first step in analysis is to obtain as full and complete an understanding of the client
as possible from cumulative records, autobiographies, anecdotal records,
psychological tests and interviews. A trained counsellor will not necessarily limit
himself to any particular approach. He tries to secure as much information as
practicable from different tools or techniques. The information thus obtained has to


--- PAGE 120 ---
100 Counsellingand Guidance
be synthesized. Synthesis esswitially consists of ordering and arranging the data so
that it helps in dhignosis.
Diagnosis as a method in counselling is disfavoured in client-centered therapy.
According to Rogers, in diagnozing, the client is treated as an object The locus of
responsibility is shifted to the counsellor. Gathering diagnostic information produces
no change in the client Further there is a danger of the counsellor becoming
committed to his diagnosis and, therefore, failing to see significant new attitudes
in" the client Diagnosis is, therefore, considered inimical to client-centered
counselling. However, in the trait-and-factor approach it is considered to be the
necessary first step in counselling. Diagnosis consists of the interpretation of data
in terms of the problems indicated, the assets and liabilities and the strengths and
weaknesses of the counsellee. It is arrived at by a logical process of inference.
Diagnosis involves: (1) identifying the problem and (2) determining the causes, that
is searching for relationships, past, present and future, which may help in the
understanding of the causes of the symptoms.
Diagnosis is always of the nature of a hypothesis and, therefore, should be open
to modification. Diagnosis is primarily the function of the counsellor. This does not
however mean that the counsellor can do his work without the active cooperation
of the counsellee in the process. The next step after diagnosis is prognosis. Diagnosis
and prognosis are both relevant to the goals the counsellee strives to achieve. While
diagnosis is concerned with the past and the present, prognosis is concerned with
the future.
The next step in the treatment is counselling proper. This is effected through
counselling sessions or interviews in which the counsellee is helped to try different
solutions without fear of ridicule or criticism. There are no limitations imposed on
the client regarding the number of solutions he may try. He is free to try as many
as he likes till he is able to reach an optimal solution.
The last step, usually neglected but most important, is the follow up. This
concerns the counsellor's continued interest in the counsellee and includes the
assistance the counsellor gives to deal with new problems of a recurring nature.
HOW COUNSELLING IS IMPLEMENTCD
The directive approach outlines five techniques in the implementation of counselling.
These are: (1) forcing conformity, (2) changing the environment, (3) selecting the
appropriate environment, (4) learning the needed skills and (5) changing attitudes,
lite counsellor establishes rapport with the client and helps him to achieve self-
understanding. If the client is unable to do this, the counsellor forces conformity
or resorts to the other techniques listed above. In forcing conformiQ' the counsellor
may use direct advising, that is, talk frankly and state his own position in clear and
unambiguous terms. Next, he may employ the persuasive method. The counsellor
collects the relevant evidence and explains logically the course of action and
persuades the client to try it.
The explanatory method is often considered most desirable. In this the counsellor
patiently explains the diagnosdc data and points to the different ways in which the
counsellee can utilize his potendalities and environmental resources.


--- PAGE 121 ---
Approaches to CounseJIIng 101
When a reasonable course of action has emerged the counsellor may assist the
counsellee in its implementation. For example, if some learning deficiencies are
diagnozcd, the counsellor may work out a remedial programme which would help
the client (in this case, the student) to overcome them. If the counsellor is confronted
with problems he is unable to cope with he has to make referrals to specialized
agencies for assistance.
The Minnesota approach stresses the use of measurement and prediction. It
seeks out objective and dependable data about the client and helps him to make an
appropriate choice or decision in the resolution of his problem. Obviously this
approach is a rational, problem-solving one though the importance of emotions
cannot be ignored. This approach stresses that human individuals are rational and
are, therefore, capable of making proper choices or finding solutions to their
problems. What hinders in this process is ignorance or lack of information regarding
the individual himself or the environment or both. If the necessary information is
made available, the client being rational, should be able to solve his problems. In
this approach there is an element of direction which, of course, is not authoritarian
but is a kind of cognitive direction or explanation. In this the didactic technique is
used by the counsellor to help the client understand his assets and liabilities and his
potentialities for growth. With such self-knowledge the counsellee should be able
to make proper choices in educational and vocational Helds or find solutions to
problems of a personal nature.
The limitations of this approach are:
1. The trait-and-factor approach has been developed in an educational setting
concerning adolescents and early adults. The nature of the clientele and the
setting are such that the problems encountered cannot help having an
educational and/or vocational flavour.
2. This approach overemphasizes rationality or reason and does not give
adequate attention to affective elements.
3. It places too much reliance on objective data. It is a moot point that
psychological test data are often claimed to lack objectivity. No test can be
valid in all simations and for all persons. And it is impossible to individualize
the test and yet claim objectivi^.
THE ECLECTIC APmOACH
There is no gainsaying the fact that counsellors, like medical men, adopt variations
of their theoretical positions in actual practice. This kind of variation becomes
necessary to suit diflerent individuals and specific situations. From a strictly
theoretical point of view it may be argued that it is unscientific to stray away from
wy given theory no matter by how small a degree. It is argued with equ^ vehemence
that puritanical rigidity may be counter-productive and that if one wishes to succeed,
one must appreciate the realistic aspects and variations in clients' backgrounds,
experiences, expectations and goals on the one hand, and situational differences on
the other. Most pracdtioners in actual practice adopt minor to major variations in
their theoretical orientations. They adopt different view points which are consistently


--- PAGE 122 ---
IQ2 Counselling and Guidance
combined into a working theory. This trend in practiUoners' approach towardstheory is often described as 'emerging eclecticism'. Each counseUor must sooner
or later develop a point of view which may be called uniquely his own. Thedivergencies in current theories of personality also point to the reason why no one
theory or method of approach is fully adequate for any counsellor, for different
types of clients and for different kinds of situations. Such a pragmatic approach is
likely to exhibit several theoretical inconsistencies. But it should be realized that
developing a unique view encompassing all the variations and incorporating alt the
salient feamres of all the theories is a very demanding and lifelong task. A practitioner
cannot afford to await the development of such an all-encompassing point of view
before he takes on the pressing task of helping others. The preceding lines imply
that there could be as many different ^es of eclecticism as there are practicing
counsellors. There may be some who refuse to identify themselves with any particular
theoretical system, such as psycho-analysis or existentialism or behaviourism. Some,
it will be seen, under-emphasize the importance of theory. They contend that it is
wasteful, if not dangerous, to be drawn into the vortex of academic controversy
over the issue of theories when there are raging differences in the points of view
and approaches of the extant theories. Instead they believe that it is best to draw
firom all theories and not be bogged down by the limitations of any particular
theory. This would give them the freedom to choose from lime to time the principles
and ideas that would best suit their current specific needs. Some counsellors go to
the extent of claiming to be non-theoretically oriented, stating that what they are
really concerned with is to provide relief to the client, here, and now, and not to
enter into the polemics of theories. They declare that they are least concerned with
theory building.
Even though some counsellors disclaim interest in the theoretical aspects of
counselling, each one has some conception of the underlying structure and dynamics
of his client's personality. He may not be able to adequately verbalize his ideas and
argue about its strengths and weaJoiesses. His is a case of practice first and perhaps
theory later. But others claim that "in practice, a consistent frame of reference is
desirable" (Patterson, 1973).
English and English (1958) define eclecticism in theory building as the selection
and orderly combination of compatible features from diverse sources and of
incompatible theories and systems into a harmonious whole. The resultant system
is open to constant revision even in its major outlines. Eclecticism is to be
distinguished from unsystematic and uncritical combination of things. The eclectic
seeks consistency as far as possible. The formalist sees the eclectic's position as too
loose and uncritical. The eclectic finds the schools (theories) too formal, dogmatic
and rigid. The newer concept of eclecticism is not a theoretical. The recognition
that no one theoretical orientation is adequate to deal with the complexities of a
variety of individuals suggests the need for an integrated, comprehensive and
pragmatic approach.
Brammer (1969) explains that eclecticism in counselling refers to selecting, or
choosing from various systems or theories. What is selected, presumably, is the
best of each system. The question, 'what is best?' is seldom explained satisfactorily.
The matter of choosing what is 'best' from each system is left to the counsellor to


--- PAGE 123 ---
Approaches to Counselling 103
decide under the given circumstances, and this can lead to much avoidable
controversy. It is explained that the choices of principles are never made in advance
but arc made as and when they are found to be expedient in working with the
counsellees. It is, therefore, not practicable to predict what an eclectist will do in
a given situation. This suggests that the position of every eclectic counsellor will
naturally differ from every other eclectician, making the position impossible to
define or describe. Carkhuff and Berenson (1967) call this approach an 'eclectic
stance' which they believe is systematic. They claim the 'openness' of this approach
to be an advantage.
According to an important protagonist of the eclectic point of view, Thome
(1950), eclecticism is the most practicable and apt approach to counselling. He
points to the fact that there are wide personalia differences and no single theory
of personality can justifiably encompass all phenomena. Similarly, the problems of
individuals vary both in content and intensity and an approach suitable to one
individual need not necessarily suit another individual. Tlierefore, it is necessary
that the therapy be individualized. It must be such that it is relevant to the problem
and the client. This suggests an approach of robust common sense utilizing the
contributions of all recognized systems and schools of psychotherapy according to
their indications and contra-indications.
Thome calls this 'integrative psychology' and claims that it provides systematic
theoretical foundations for eclectic clinical practice. Brammer (1969) is critical
about "choosing bits and pieces from a wide spectrum of counselling theories and
methods" and holds that it is a "hodge-podge of contradictory assumptions and
incompatible techniques". He instead suggests the need for developing a
comprehensive, consistent and systematic synthesis "incorporating all valid
knowledge about behaviour". In support of this position. Woods (1964) states, "if
there were no theoretical positions, there would be no eclecticism".
The therapeutic implications of integrative psychology arc:
1. All psychopathological or disturbed conditions are examples of disorders of
integrations and the goal of all methods of psychological counselling is to
strengthen and improve the quality of the integrative process, thus fostering
higher levels of self-actualizations. The specific goal of all therapeutic
counselling is to alter the existing psychological state. The counsellor's
focus is, therefore, the person in the present situation: "The psychological
state of the person running the business of his life in the world".
2. The therapist has to assess whether the client has the necessary resources to
take on the responsibilities of his life.
3. If the therapist is satisfied, he gives the client the responsibility of taking on
some routine tasks to start with.
4. Therapy involves the training and re-education of the client in acquiring the
controls necessary for self-regulation.
Thome prefers the term 'psychological case handling' to 'psychotherapy* for the
reason that the effectiveness of the psychotherapeutic methods has so far not been
convincingly demonstrated. The former terra is broader and more comprehensive
and includes all activities not necessarily confined to psychotherapy alone.


--- PAGE 124 ---
104 Counsellingand Guidance
The steps in psychological case handling are:
1. Making a diagnosis systematically to obtain a complete picture of the client's
problem.
2. Understanding the methods completely, including their strengths and
weaknesses, their limitadons and contra-indications, which could be employed
in the treatment
3. Concentrating on the basic or underlying causes rather than treating the
superficial symptoms.
4. Choosing a speciflc method suited to the needs of the client
5. Evaluating the method on the basis of the results obtained, (in this the
therapist must recognize that there can never be universally applicable
methods.)
6. Scientifically analysing the data and evaluating the results.
According to Thome (1968), the major objectives of psychological case handling
are: (1) precluding and halting the aggravation of the problem or condition, (2)
rectifying etiological factors to prevent a recurrence of the problem, (3) mitigating
suffering through systematic support, (4) facilitating personality growth through the
removal of obstacles and re-education, (5) helping expression and clarifying
emotional attitudes, (6) resolving conflicts and inconsistencies and thus promoting
maturation and growth, (7) enabling the individual to accept what cannot be
changed—'endure what cannot be cured' and (8) changing attitudes and maximizing
resources to catalyze self-actualization by improving integrational status.
Case handling should be based on an individual appraisal of each case. The plan
should include suitable measures for beginning the relationship and unearthing and
identifying the problem for dealing with the psychopathological symptoms and
related etiological factors. The therapist may utilize ^1 available methods for an
early termination of the case.
Counselling is defined as a face-lo-face relationship in which the counsellor, a
person competently trained in psychological science, consciously attempts by means
of attitudes and speech to help others solve problems of life in which personality
factors are the primary etiologic agents. Thome holds that a client seeks counselling
assistance because he has problems with which he is unable to cope with alone.
Consequently the counselling relationship, no matter how non-directive it may be,
assumes a dominance-submission, relationship. The direction of counselling depends
on the assistance that is sought and the client's potentialities for effective self-
regulation. Thome believes that human nature or personality is reflected in the
manner in which the individual interacts with his environment. There are a series
of drives which activate the individual, like the drive for higher organization, the
drive to achieve and maintain stability and the drive to integrate opposing functions
so as to avoid imbalance. Human nature exhibits a constant striving for unity
manifesting itself in efforts to consistently maintain integrity and organization of
the self.
s From the eclectic point of view, personality development is regarded as a struggle
to transcend affective, impulsive and unconscious determinants of behaviour by
learning and perfecting rational, logical and voluntary control of behaviour. An


--- PAGE 125 ---
Approaches to Counselling 105
individual's life style shows distinctive on'ensive-defensive strategies for satisfying
needs and coping with reali^ by the use of various mechanisms and expressive
styles. The self develops in consciousness around feelings of personal identity and
by experiencing what is happening to oneself. The self-image is the self one thinks
oneself to be. Thus, the self is able to regulate the whole organism and to even
cause it to do things that are against its own interests. In an abnormal state the self
may not be aware of itself and hence may not be able to control cotain functionings.
The self-concept is crucial since it operates as the functional core of being. Personality
development is affected by constitutional, biological and cultural factors as well as
by the drive for self-actualization. The drive for self-actualization is a powerful
drive which motivates human beings towards improvement or perfection. The
awareness of alternatives and the possibility of decision-making imply freedom
iiom mechanistic determination. The need for making choices introduces the need
to have a value system and to be responsible for one's actions. Human life reaches
its most outstanding heights in moments of highest self-actualization and self-
transcendence. llie striving or working towards it constitutes positive mental health.
Garfield (1969) summarizes Thome's system as one which is comprehensive
and organized and which has brought together a varieQ' of methods though it still
remains essentially a loosely gathered system.
SUMMARY
Some of the representative approaches to counselling have been outlined In
brief. Several lacunae are evident In the approaches. These approaches difh^
with regard to the importance they attach to rationality in human behaviour. At
one extreme the behavioural approach to counselling tends to view human
behaviour as simply reactive and as entirely determined by the environment.
The p^choanalytical view takes a dim view of human rationality and explains
human behaviour eis mostly unconsciously caused by irrational forces. They
believe that the environment exerts little. If any, ellect on the unconsdous. This
negattvlstic view of man presents a pessimistic and unedl^rlng view of human
nature. The client-centered approach places a great premium on man's goodness
and makes it the focal theme. The existential view-point views man as purposeful,
seeking the meaning of life and striving to determine his own destiny. The trait-
and-factor approach believes In the indtvlduai's capacity to act rationally and
purposefully, provided he Is ^en the necessary assistance to use his innate
resources. The eclecticapproach, we have seen tries to combine into a consistent
^stem the positive aspects of all the systems. All the approaches aim at reducing
man's suffering and increasing his efficiency, productivity and happiness. Ford
and Urban (1963) explain that there are differences in the view of human nature
held by different approaches to counselling. Some tiieorles, they hold, consider
man as a pilot steering his course and others consider him as a mere robot,
automatlcdiy controlled by suitable manipulations of the environment by the
counsellor. The behavlouilstic approaches take a mechanistic view and explain
human behaviour to result fiom suitable operations of environmental stimulations.
Notwithstanding this partial, limited and dismal view of man taken by many
theories, much faith is reposed In the view that human nature is modifiable.


--- PAGE 126 ---
106 CaunseUIng and Guidance
Nothing Is ever unredeemable. Given ttie patience and facilities man's apparently
chaotic and destructive life could be directed tov/ards more meaningful
worttiwhile goals and towards gaining self-actuallzatlon through re-education.
There Is agreement concerning the importance of recognizing man's
Individuality, freedom and responsibility. It Is also the consensus that It is desirable
to enhance ttiese Individual 'rights'. Behavioural approaches, though apparendy
concerned with symptom-relief, aim at enabling the Individual to function better,
or In other words, to achieve Increasing expression.
In terms of techniques, tfie major approaches also show some Important
differences, aient-centered, tr^t-and-factor. existential and p^choarailytlcal
approaches look upon providing Insight as a major technique of therapy.
these the Individual Is given heedom and encouraged to talk openly. It Is
through the 'talklng-out' process ttiat the IncUvldual gains Insight Into himself
and understands the significance of the symptoms underlying his difficulties. The
gaining of In^ght either dispels the difficulties or helps In their elimination.
Behavlourally-orlented approaches are concerned with symptoms, behaviour
and actions which they seek to eliminate, modify and change by suitably
manipulating the environmental stimulations and reinforcements.
Counsellor education and training stress the need for developing a plairslble
and consistent approach which is meaningful In terms of one's values and
expectations. The counsellor's own experience, his personality and his view of
man, all affect his 'personalized' approach to counselling. No counsellor would
accept the view points of all the approaches fer the simple reason that they are
at variance with one another. Therefore, he has obviously to pick and choose
only those Ideas, principles, techniques and methods that appeal' to him as
being meaningful, useful and practicable. As a professional worker, he has to
develop a style of functioning which Is uniquely his own. In the course of his
professional practice, he may gain new Insights which enable him to re-evaluate
his Ideas, principles, methods and techniques and perhaps modl^ some of
them slightly, change a few significantly and abandon a few others for the one's
he believes to be more meaningful and purposeful In the context of his present
situation (client's problem). It would be a grave error If one were to believe that
a counsellor could function without a theoretical basis. No one can operate in a
vacuum. However Inexperienced a counsellor may be. he Implicitly operates on
the basis of some theory. This he Is perfectly free to modify, clwige or even
abandon on the basis of his experience for another point of view which he
considers more benefldal.


--- PAGE 127 ---
6
CounsellmM Proem
INTRODUCTION
The term 'counselling' is used by individuals engaged in different occupational
fields like school counselling, employment counselling, marriage'counselling, and
so on. They (the professional counsellors) have much in common as th^ are all
concerned with helping others. Counsellor's efforts whether crisis based or
developmental based have a clear focus on the counsellee's future. An essential
aspect of all counselling relationships is to help the counsellee focus on his/her
personal future, explore the desirable possibilities and their feasibility to develop
plans that would lead to a desirable Fesolution of the problem situation(s). In trying
to help the counsellee reach this goal, the counsellor has to inspire feelings of trust,
credlbili^ and confidence. This is done through communicating to the counsellee
his caring attitude and his positive regard for him, irrespective of his position. The
counsellor strives to understand rather than judge the behaviour of the people he
is trying to help. Before thinking about how to accomplish something he has to
clarify what is to be accomplished. Counselling emphasizes growth and enhancement
as an important goal. It is necessary that we imderstand and distinguish between
growth that is healthy and growth that is not. Rogers (1961), Blocher (1966), Ellis
(1967), Erikson (1968), Maslow (1968), White (1973), Jourard (1974) have referred
to the different aspects of 'desirable growth' in individuals. A person with healthy
growth will show an increasing tendency to behave confidently and make decisions,
exhibit commitment to appropriate goals, reveal self-control, be capable of impartially
appraising a situation and acting rationally and effectively. He will be willing to
learn from his mistakes and use his ingenuity to deal with each new crisis. He will
be clear about his motivations, beliefs, feelings, assumptions and values.
Counselling can best be described as a nmcess. This implies an identifiable
sequenc€~tif~evenis taking place over a period of time. Successful and effective
counselling may take as little as thirty minutes, it may take a few sessions or it may
take months, lite sequence of events, the dynamics involved and the nature and
extent of exploration differ with each individual counsellee. However, the stages in
the process are broadly similarjfor most individuals. The stages usually include:initial appointment, (^"^re-counselliitg s^sionjpvolving art exploi^on of^e client's concern(s), (•3y"ftSv«To5rr'"^t "l' a'ffleilitanve r^tifl&b^
specitlcation,' iaehff'^ation and .cnnsideration of factors-related to the achi^ement
ot soiuuon(s), ta^eveiopment and implementation of a~~"' tr/^a


--- PAGE 128 ---
IQg Counsellli^and Guidance
achievement, (6»'^valuation of results, .^termination of relationship and (8)foUow-up. ,
"Outcome goals are the intended results of the counselling process. They reter ^
what the counsellee desires to achieve with the assistance of a counsellor. Process
goals are those future events which the counsellor considers helpful or instrumen^in bringing about outcome goals. Process goals are often described in terms of th®counsellor actions and also in terms of the effects to be experienced by the client.
For example, a counsellor may say to himself, "in order to help the counsellee,
must understand his attitudes and the way he behaves towards others, I rnus
understand the circumstances which have led to the present situation and ihos®
which are reinforcing the counsellee's behaviour".
PREPARATION FOR COUNSELLING
Readiness
The initial step in counselling is readiness on the pan of a potential counsellee to
be help^. For instance, many people smoke. Even though they are aware that
is undesirable and injurious they persist in the habit From among them a few may
desire to give up smoking and are ready to seek assistance to gel rid of the habit-
Yet others may not bother themselves about this and will naturally make no efToiis
to give up the habit Thus readiness is the first step in the counselling process. It
is this that makes the client seek the assistance of the counsellor.
There are a number of factors affecting readiness. The first among them
ignorance. Individuals may persist in certain kinds of habits without having th®
least idea that such habits are undesirable. Therefore, there is no question of tryinS
to give them up. The second factor is the common psychological phenomenon-
called resistance. Individuals tend to be apathetic owing to an innate resistance (ot
change. The third factor is lack of motivation. An individual may be aware that a
particular habit is undesirable but he may not be sufficiently motivated to do
something about it The points enumerated above are serious obstacles to readiness
and are subjective or client-centered. Apart from this, readiness may be lacking
owing to situational problems, such as non-availability of competent assistance. In
otho- words, while the individual may desire a change, he is helpless because h®
does not know whom to approach or does not have the time or other resources to
seek help. Readiness is partly determined by the subjective feelings of the individual
and partly by the situational obstacles. Most of these obstacles can be overcome by
providing the necessary information to potential clients who may, in addition to
other things, have false notions regarding the costs. But the basic obstacle, namely*
attitude, is not easily ameijable to change. For example, many people may belief®
that consulting a counsellor is socially damaging. One of the important services of
counselling is concerned with preparing clients for counselling. There are a number
of referral agencies. For example, a teacher at school may identify a pupil's problen»
and ask the parents of the pupil to obtain the necessary assistance. If there is 8
helping agency like a school psychologist or a counselling centre available the
teacher could refer the case to them. This has certain advantages. The agency


--- PAGE 129 ---
Counselling Process 109
would take the initiative and contact the potendal clienL It could overcome the
resistance and shyness of the prospective client and ultimately succeed in bringing
the client to the counselling centre. If this were to fail, the agency could meet the
parents of the pupils and Impress upon them the need for intervention. If this were
also to fail the agency could resort to disciplinary measures. But as a rule counselling
services do not visi^ize employing disciplinary action for counselling purposes.
The best method of bringing about client readiness Is through dissemination of
informatiCHi. Meeting the subjects individually as well as in groups to discuss the
need to seek assistance could be helpful. The other method is to give the prospective
client as complete an information as possible. This helps to draw the attention of
the client to his problems which he may not have initially been aware of.
Administering problem checklists or asking subjects to fill an adjustment inventory
would be of value.
Usually clients fall under two broad categories: (1) The first category consists
of those who voluntarily seek assistance. Such persons are aware of their problems.
They feel uneasy and want to be relieved of their suffering. (2) The other category
of clients is usually referred to the counsellor by school autfiorities, parents, civic
authorities (police) or courts. The clients in this category may again be further
classified into two categories: those who want to profit from counselling and improve
themselves and those who resent it This category of people are not ready for
counselling and usually do not cooperate with the counsellor.
Pre-counselling Interview
When once the client has reached the stage of readiness the next stage Is the pre-
cotmselling interview or the Initial interview. The pre-counselling interview has
very simple objectives. It is meant to apprise the client of his responsibilities, the
modus operandi o^ihe counselling service, the frequency and the time of the
counselling sessions and also the amount of fees (if charged). The pre-counselling
interview must also concern itself with obtaining personal data and other such basic
information regarding the client The counsellor on his part tries to establish an
initial contact which could go a long way in establishing rapport and a healthy
counselling.relatiCHiship. While the counselling expectations cannot be fully discui^sed
at this stage the client must be given some idea of it
From the material obtained in the pre-counselling interview the counsellor can
fmmulate his strategies as how best to proceed with the client Usually the pre-
counselling interview is followed by a couple of counselling sessions during which
the counsellor strives to obtain as clear a picture as is practicable of the client's
problems. If the counsellee is less communicative, more sessions may be needed.
Simultaneously the counsellor tries to inform himself about the client as completely
and fi^y as p^ible by reswting to anecdotal records, case history, autobiographical
and biographical reports and other such sources.
Brammer and Shostrom (1960) discuss the importance of readiness during the
interview. In this the importance of motivating the clients is stressed for a client
may not return after having called once, or even if he were to return, may wear a
facade and may mislead the counsellor through unconscious devices of resistance.
The client may fluently report much simpler problems like difficult in


--- PAGE 130 ---
jjQ CounssUlngancl Guidance
remembering things, not knowing how to study, and so on. There is a distinct
possibility for the counsellor to get caught with these apparent problems. Anexperienced counseUor would be able to see through this facade in a short whUe
and persuade the "client to come forth with a redefinition of the problem". Thecounsellor can easily gauge client-readiness in terms of the positive attitudes exhibited
by the client and in terms of his spontanei^ and eagerness to talk. These iiithcate
lowered defensiveness. However, the articulateness of the client and his abiliQr to
express ideas and feelings does not always mean that the client is ready to deal with
the emotion^ implications of his problems.
Case History
In the preparation for counselling the importance of the case history of the client
cannot be overemphasized. "A case history is a syslerriadc collection of facts about
the client's current and past life" (Brammer and Shostrom, 1960). Counsellors with
different orientations place different degrees of emphasis on case history and use
different kinds of materials. A psychoanalytically-oriented counsellor m*ay look for
important childhood experiences while a counsellor trained in a different tradition
(social wori:) may emphasize the environmental circumstances of the client A
vocational counseUor would naturally look for items having a direct bearing on the
vocational choice, and an educational counseUor would look for relevant facts in
school and the early training period for the difficulties encountered by the cUeht
with his academic work at present
Process of Counselling
The process of counselling is set in motion with the making of an appointment by
the cUeni. This is foUowed by the actual caUing of the client. The client brings with
him his attitudes and feelings towards himself, towards the counsellor and towards
the very concq)t of counselUng. The client may have problems such as the choice
of a career, self-acceptance, or adjusunent to the kind of work that is required at
school or coUege. The more meaningful the problem is, the more strongly will he
feel about his difficulty. Each cUeni reacts to the first interview in a unique mannen
The counsellor knows that most people experience difficulty in not only asking for
help but also in accepting help. Often they are reluctant to face the consequences
of change. To some people receiving help means other things as well. Some view
it as an admission of inadequacy or faUure. A few take the attitude that they eitho"
need no assistance or cannot be helped. Such an attitude often results from fear of
personal involvement that may be demanded in a counselUng situation. Thus there
is an ambivalence of motives and the opting for help represents a culmination in
the struggle between the desire to seek help and the negative feeUngs that prevent
one firom asking for help. The decision to seek help is regarded by counsellors as
a positive stq) as it necessarily impUes the counsellee's acceptance of hisftter
responsibilities. Freud recognizes this psychological ambivalence as basic to aU
feelings and actionSi Rank (1945) terms it the 'counter wiU* which is the negative
component to every positive endeavour.


--- PAGE 131 ---
CounselllngProeess 111
Reasons for Maldng an Appointment
A formal statement of why a client goes to the counsellor frequently tells very little
about the real nature of the situation. By requesting the client to elaborate on
cotain aspects of the problem the counsellor gives the client an opportunity to
crystallize and to organize his own ideas, thoughts and feelings regarding the issues
that concern him. At this stage of discussion a great deal of latent anxiety comes
to the surface. The client may realize that his problem is more serious or more
compelling than he had imagined jt to be at the outset. It is also sometimes found
that the latent anxiety comes to the surface accompanied by a great deal of feeling.
This marks a very important position which indicates that the client has moved
from an almost impersonal request for an appointment to a point where he is able
to share with the counsellor some aspect of his problem.
Referral
The other type of clients who call on the counsellor perhaps not on their own
initiative but at the suggestion of others, may be worried parents, troubled relatives,
perplexed friends, discouraged teachers or dissatisfied employers. Usually this
category of individuals comprise the majori^ of clients.
The question of referral is not quite as simple as it appears. The counsellor has
to consider several important and very closely related aspects, such as:
1. Why a person is referred.
2. Who the referral is made by.
3. How the referral is structured.
4. How the client perceives the referral, etc.
The reasons why clients ^ referred to a counsellor or a counselling agency
depend on a number of ^tors. Most referrals originate not fiom the client's desire
to obtain expert help but from the referral agency's/individual's experience of the
client's failure to function adequately in one or more endeavours. Therefore, quite
often counsellors Hnd their clients calling on them with a nonchalant attitude.
Nothing in the situation suggests that the referrants want new experiences. The
clients almost always ask no questions, answer in monosyllables and appear to be
very much relieved at the termination of the interview. There is an important matter
of social significance that might account for this atdtude. Our society seems to
attach some kind of stigma to seeking counselling help. This is because a large
number of people do not understand ^e objectives of counselling. The fear of
social ostracization may prevent potential clients from readily seeking counselling
assistance.
It is necessary that the counsellor understands why. the client has been referred
to him and whether he can provide the kind of assistance required. Gales (1949)
holds that sometimes several sessions are required to enable the client to come face
to face with his own problems. It is important to know who made the referral,.for
this can throw considerable light on the purpose of the referral. Referrals made by
professional people deserve particular consideration. Making a referral invariably
entails responsibility. For a referral to be effective it is necessary that the client


--- PAGE 132 ---
112 Counselling and Guidance
shares responsibility. UsuaUy the client is not clear as to how the counsellor can
help him and sometimes may even be labouring under a misapprehension. Whaievw
the client's position may be, the counsellor always begins with the reality as it
appears to the client Misconceptions arising from ignorance can be handled without
much harm to the client
The structure of the referral is another issue of considerable importance. The
client should be u>ld that he may have to take a few psychological tests or be asked
a few questions. Although the structuring of the referral is not usually crucial to the
outcome of the counselling process, it can certainly help or hinder the progress of
the cotuiselling process, at least in the initial stages. A client who comes to the
counsellor to seek advice may view the counsellor as an expert and hence take no
responsibility in the decision-making process and may not play his real part in the
counselling relationship. An exasperated teacher may send a student to the counsellor
who may find that the concern^ student views him with suspicion and hostility.
The student may not be disposed to think of the counsellor as a professionally
trained person capable of assisting him to solve his problems.
The way the client perceives the referral and his counsellor are equally important
in the counselling process. This is determined largely by his basic personality
structure and his understanding of his situation. This, in turn, will determine what
the counsellor says to the client and what the tests (if given) reveal. It is postulated
that the more immature the client, the greater will be the extent of appercepiive
distortion.
Anxiety
Anxiety is another important factor which impels people to seek assistance. When
examined carefully it represents the conflicts between opposing needs, motives or
desues in the educational and vocational areas or personal life that motivate the
client to seek professional assistance. Unless the client feels anxious or unsure of
his plans or ambivalent about some choice, he does not need the help of a counsellor.
The very essence of counselling lies in helping the client to recognize the conflicting
feelings inherent in most problems and to accept them as a part of his real self.
There can be no counselling without the client experiencing some anxiety.
It is not unusual for the counsellor to once in a while come across clients who
are aware that something is a miss or wrong with them but are incapable of going
through the coimselling process. They either have no time or patience or are afraid
of facing facts. There are also a few clients who are otherwise psychologically
soimd but develop anxiety in response to an environmental difficulty, such as the
loss of one's job or a loved person. Anxieties engendered by a particular predicament
can be ameliorated if the client mobilizes his own resources and faces his problems
squarely. This requires support which is likely to express itself as a desire for
reassurance which the counsellor can provide.
The First Interview
The counselling process, generally speaking, consists of three parts: the request for
assistance (intake), the counselling proper (counselling) and the termination of the


--- PAGE 133 ---
CounselllrigProcess 113
relationship (termination). The first interview is the beginning of the actual contact
between (he client and the counsellor. Usually the client approaches the counsellor
cautiously. He is unsure of what is going to happen. Thus much of what takes place
during the first interview is concerned with the probing and, if possible, with the
identification of the problem. Either the client or the counsellor may open the
discussion. There are no rigid rules about who should start talking first. The client-
counsellor relationship is usually established during the initial interview. The fees,
if any, duration and frequency of interviews, kinds of psychological tests to be
administered, if necessary, and other related issues are discussed. The client is
made to understand that he has to function within a system or structure and that it
is up to him to make whatever use he can of counselling. Also, he is informed of
the limitations of the situation and the counselling process so that he docs not
harbour any misconceptions or false expectations.
Reassurance
By reassurance is meant the assuaging of anxiety. Thus it plays a significant part
in counselling situations. Reassurance is considered as one of the important functions
of the counselling interview. Usually the need for support and reassurance is thought
of as an expression of emotional conflict. Like the other aspects of the helping
process, reassurance is usually structured and does not connote a uniform meaning
to all people as do other psychological phenomena. The need to be reassured stems
from an inner anxiety. As the termination of the counselling relationship approaches,
the client experiences and may even express new fears. This indicates that the client
has not overcome all his fears and doubts.
Wiming Confidence
The counselling relationship is a face-to.-face and often one-to-one relationship in
which the client is encouraged to express himself without any apprehension or
hesitation and without any fear of ridicule or criticism. Therefore, it is necessary
that the counsellor wins the confidence of the client. There are no sure techniques
of achieving this. But a professionally trained counsellor has no difficulty in
establishing warm and friendly relationships which help win the confidence of his
clients. This would, in turn, help establish rapport which is the essence of the
counselling relationship. It is possible that the counsellor may subtly cajole and
persuade the client to share with him his ideas and thoughts. Distrust on the part
of the client has to be met and handled as a part of the reality of the counselling
situation. There is no reason for the client to trust the counsellor. He may well be
within his rights in not trusting him. But this adversely affects the counselling
process. A counsellor has to learn to "view lack of trust on the part of a client as
a part of the working reality. Lack of trust is often an expression of a fundamentally
insecure individual. Such clients may often resort to the escape mechanism of
submissiveness, silence and maintaining a 'you know the best' attitude, and are ^
naturally difficult to manage, but it is the counsellor's responsibility to help his
client urespecdve of these several limitations.


--- PAGE 134 ---
114 Counselling and Guidance
Advising
Advising is most often mistaken for counselling. In guidance situations sometimes
advice may be given, this cannot be taken to form part of either guidance or
counselling. Jones (1945) holds, "it is never safe to give advice except when you
know that the other fellow will not follow it". Advising is undesirable for more
reasons than one. Firstly, it makes the client dependent, secondly, it assumes that
the client is incapable of acting on his own and thirdly, it assumes that the client
does not have the necessary ability to take decisions. This runs counter to one of
the basic postulates of counselling, namely, that the client is rational and has the
necessary ability to take care of himself if given the opportunity of doing so.
Advice giving is faulty because of the implicit assumption that the counsellor
knows what is best for the client It is easy for the client to follow tlie advice for
then he need not be responsible for the outcome. Psychologically speaking, advice
giving is an act of imposition of the counsellor's ideas upon the client Offering
advice is professionally not an accqjiable practice.
COUNSEIUNG RELATIONSHIP
The core of the counselling process is the reladonship established between the
counsellor and the client We had occasion to examine how the attitudes of both
the counsellor and the client affect the relationship. It is by means of this relationship^t the counsellor elicits and recognizes the significant feelings and ideas that^t^ine the behaviour of the client It also helps the client to recognize thesefeelings and ideas. This determines th^quality of the relationship and affects theprogress of the counselling process. (Relatjonship' has immense significance inc^n^ing. It acts as a curative agent ft its oira right Most clients do not have
rt "I'f "^r-P«sonaI relationships and, therefore, are not able to make harmoniousana self-satisfying adjustments. The counsellor helps the client make effective inter
personal relationships and to free him^m unrealistic aspirations. In this role thecoui^Uor plays the part of a teacher^Pqiinsky.and Pepinsky (1954) define thisrelationship "as a hypothetical construct to designate the inferred affective characterot the observable interaction between two individuals." Pepinsky emphasizes the
^ecuve or emotional elements in the relationship. It is necessary to examine thetum^sions and characteristics of this relationship a little more closely.
Uniqueness-commonness comprises an important dimension of the counsellingrelationship. At the outset it should be recognized that each client-counsellorrelationship is unique(No two individuals are alike and hence it is not possible tohave a generalized typ^of relationship, The unique factors, for instance, comprise
counsellor and counsellee attitudes, beliefs, likes and dislikes, physical characteristics,
and social backgrounds of the counsellor and the counsellee.j
^he relationship is objective in so far as the cognitive, scientific and genericas^ts are concemed. It is subjective in so far as the relationship involves thefeeling of warmth and psychological closeness which enables the development of
intense interest in a particular client and his problems. This aspect of intense interest
depends on feelings of mutuality by which is m^t that the client believes that his


--- PAGE 135 ---
CounselHngPrcxxss 115
counsellor understands him and derives from this feeling a sense of suppoi^It isnot uncommon for a few of the clients to perceive the involvement of the couns^or
as threatening.(^[^y tend to interpret the relationship in terms of submitting orrevealing themselves to another person. Naturally they become anxious when reladng
personal feelings, especially when conveying feelings of nation. The nature of
emotional interaction determines the quality of relationshipj^he counsellor needs
to be aware of the differential levels of his impact on th^lient and of the client
on him. For instance, the counsellor may react at a physical level, taking no interest
in the client's expression of feeling. Or he may react in a firiendly way, just showing
warmth towards the counsellee. He may react to the client, ignoring the qualities
he may like or dislike in him. This type of reaction is of the nature of a genuine
personal encounter. Further he may react at a more deeper level of responding to
the emotional state of the client Response to the emotional state of the client
receives more attention in existential counselling.
Existential encounters are basically of two types: self-self encounter and self-
other encounter. In the former type the individual must understand himself both as
a subject and object The other encounter, that is, encounter with others involves
affection, fnendship, empathy' and eros. In most human encounters these four kinds
of emotional relationship receive emphasis. In this kind of relationship the counsellor
may get'emotionally involved to make the client similarly involved with him. The
basic concern underlying this is a keen interest to help the client overcome negative
feelings of rejection or anxiety.
The other dimension of the counselling relationship is cognitive-conative. The
cognitive aspects concern the exchanging of information and understanding the
implications of various courses of action. The conative elements refer to the
expression of feelings. There is need for the counsellor to interpret the client's
problem rationally. At the same time the counsellor realizes that action without
knowledge would be of little value. Therefore, he has to encourage an understanding
of feelings. Thus balance has to be maintained between the cognitive and conative
aspects.
Ambiguity
When a stimulus situation is vague and is capable of eliciting different responses
from several subjects, it is called an ambiguous situation. Bordin (1968) stresses the
importance of ambiguity for its therapeutic implications. According to him, in
many ways the counselling relationship appears vague and ambiguous to the client.
The counsellor generally structures the situation. The degree of clarification that the
client obtains is of profound importance. Ambiguity allows for projection which is
a very important defense mechanism. The client is able to project his feelings with
a little more abandon in an ambiguous (counselling) situation. This process of
projection of feelings has been recognized to be of great therapeutic value. Yet too
much ambiguity may lead to anxiety on the part of the clients who seek secure and
Structured relationships. Ambiguity is significant for another reason. It provides for
'transference' which is an important psychoanalytic concept. Transference is the
unconscious transfer of the love-hate affective relationship to the counsellor. The
ambiguity of the relationship helps in understanding the problem of emotional


--- PAGE 136 ---
116 Counselllngand Guidance
distance. Greater ambiguity may place the client in a rather vague position of not
knowing how pOTitissive the situation is and how close he can get to the councilor.
This has other professional implications. Most counsellors consider it unwise to
socialize with their clients. Th^ prefer to keep the two worlds—professional and
social—as far apart as possible. It is desirable that such a rigid position should not
be adopted in dealing with human relationships.
ResponslbDity
Responsibility is yet another characteristic of the counselling relationship. How
much responsibili^ should the counsellor accept for the outcomes of counselling?
How far should the counsellor share the client's troubles? Should counselling be
viewed as a very serious business in which the counsellor endeavours to play his
rightful part? Counsellors differ in their interpretation of what they expect from the
clients in terms of responsibility. While it can be stated without fear of contradiction
that no counsellor should ever take the responsibility of running the client's life,
that is, selecting the goals for him, all counsellors accept the importance or need
of providing sound advice. Counsellors may even have to assume certain liabilities
for the possible outcome of the counselling relationship for the simple reason that
the outcome is influenced by their own personality in addition to that of the
counsellee's. The amount of responsibility that a client is asked to shoulder or that
a counsellor should be willing to share depends on a variety of factors, such as the
client's age, ability, background and type of problem. It would suffice to state that
mutual responsibilities have to be worked out in each case, taking all the factors
into account
COUNSttUNG—CONUNT AND PROCESS
pie several theories examined in the preceding section all Indicate that counsellingIS a complex function which aims at changing the outlook of a counsellee from one
m^k^ by anxiety, pain and suffering to one of self-understanding, self-assurance
significant reduction in anxiety and maladjustment This change is obtainedthrough counselling which is essentially a relation between the counsellee and the
counsellor. It is a one-to-one relationship in which a person who is in need of helpvolTOtarily seeks assistance firam a professionally competent individual who isb^i^ly concerned with alleviating the suffering of the client through a helping
relationship. This relationship is a blend of several factors, such M rapport, empathy,
understanding, acceptance and above all a sense of commitment.
Setting
Counseling can best be carried out under certain optimal conditions which includethe physical setting. The physical setting, that is, the room in which counselling is
rendered must be free from outside disturbances. The room should be simple but
tastefully furnished, should give a feeling of warmth, and should be comfortable,
with lighting that is neither too flashy and bright nor too dull and depressing. It


--- PAGE 137 ---
CounseJUngProcess 117
should , have good ventilation. In short, it should be comfortable such that a
relaxed atmosphere is provided in which the counseliee can talk in a relaxed mood-
There is a danger of taking the physical setting for granted and, more often than
not, it is neglected to such an extent that it seriously interferes with the counselling
process.
Privacy
The essence of counselling and, for that matter, of all professional relationships, is
privacy—not only physical privacy but also psychological privacy. The question of
privacy is very intricately connected with that of recording counselling interviews.
Much controversy centres on the question of whether or not to record the counsellee's
responses. One view is that any attempt at recording may interfere with the v^
process of counselling and harm the rapport established. It is also argued that the
counseliee may become defensive and inhibit his responses. The idea is that any
suggestion of recording could have adverse effects. Those who are in favour of
recording feel that it is necessary. They argue that the counsellor should have
m^rial to go over as many times as he desires for understanding and appreciating
what the counseliee has said. Without such a record the counsellor is forced to rely
upon his memory which is known to be faulty and which can introduce new
elaborations and distortions. Exclusive reliance on memory is thus certainly
undesirable. It is further argued that if. a healthy rapport has been established it
should not be difficult for the client to overcome any hesitation or uneasiness in a
short while, when the counsellor explains the purpose of the recording. There are
others who hold that recording could be done unobtrusively using gadgets such as
camouflaged tape recorders and concealed microphones. Such devices, it is argued,
do not embarrass the clienL The client then will have no reason to feel any hesitancy.
The antagonists of recording hold that it is imethical to keep the client ignorant of
tlte recording when it is actually being done. Those who are in favour of recording
argue that no client would object if the piuposes of recording are made sufficiently
clear to him. In any medical setting several such records are made and at no time
does the client resent or oppose showing his physician the records or results of
biochemical tests. By the same token, in the counselling setting also, the client
should have no objection. However, there is an important difference between the
two settings. The counselling setting is purely psychological and it cannot be
compared with a medical setting though there too privaqy is importanL
The recording of counselling sessions is a very important and nec^sary device
in training counsellors. Therefore, for training purposes at least recordings should
be made available. However, tliese need not 'real'. They could be records of
simulated counselling sessions. The controversy boils down to two factors: the
infringement on clients' rights and, second, the need for their privacy. As far as the
first is concerned, the rights of the clients are to be accepted and without tfa^
ccHisent recordings should never be attempted. As regards the second tiiere need not
be any serious problems because all counselling, wheth^ recorded or not, is expected
to ensure privacy with all its ethical and professional obligations.


--- PAGE 138 ---
118 CounseJIIngand Guidance
Value, Belief and Attitude Change
Counselling is a one-to-one relationship in which the counsellor provides a friendly
and warm environment for the counsellee to verbalize his problems and consider
the appropriate solutions. In this subtle relationship it is suggested that the counsellor
may unwittingly modify the altitudes, values and beliefs of the counsellee. This is
a highly sensitive issue. However, it is expected that the counsellor will take an
objective altitude and not allow his subjective attitudes to influence his professional
re^tionshlps. There are still some other questions, such as those regarding beliefs.
The counsellor is not opposed to criticize or exhibit an attitude of derision towards
the beliefs of the client. Such an attitude is not expected from any cultured individual,
let alone a counsellor. Therefore, this is not a serious problem. But there is the other
problem, namely, the modification of the client's beliefs. Should a counsellor do
anything in this direction? Is he justified in intervening and effecting a change in
the counsellee's beliefs? This is a very intricate and ticklish question though it may
superficially appear to be naive and innocent For example, what about the false
beliefs, such as the superstitions of the client? Should the counsellor have a stand
offish attitude? The counsellor would be perfectly within his rights if he were to
modify the false or wrong beliefs of the client But when these beliefs concern the
basic philosophy of life, or the essential culture of sociefy, or the religion of the
client, the counsellor is expected to adopt a neutral attiUide. Most civilized societies
today accept the individual's right of faith and the counsellor cannot have extra-
constitutional powers to interfere with the fundamental rights.
Value Orientations
The next issue concerns the value system or orientation of the client Following
Spi^ger's types of men, we could conceive the major value orientations of
i^viduals—theoretical, economic, political, social, religious and aesthetic. In most
situations clients are often plagued by value conflicts. Against this background
what is the counsellor expected to do? There is no question of the counsellor
forcing his value system on the client This is an outright unethical practice. However,
when there are value conflicts the counsellor should help resolve them by clarifying
the issues, overcoming the confusions of the client and adopting an attitude of
unreserved acceptance.
Acceptance
Rogers (1961) attaches great importance to the principle of acceptance. The nature
of a counselling relationship is defined and set by this principle of the counsellor
regarding the client unconditionally as a person of self-worth. Sometimes we have
conditional acceptance which no social relationship can escape. The counselling
relationship is also a kind of social relationship'and the parties, namely, the counsellor
and the client, may approach each other with different degrees of acceptance. This
is not a healthy counselling relationship.-An ideal counselling relationship is one
in which acceptance is unconditional. Complete acceptance does not involve
normative or judgemental attitudes. But it is deeply concerned with alleviating the
misery of another person. A counselling situation reveals acceptance by words.


--- PAGE 139 ---
CounsellingProcess 119
gestures, postures and the counsellee's as well as the counsellor's experience of the
feeling of being unconditionally liked, respected and understood. In this sense,
acceptance is the essence of a counselling situation.
Understanding
One of the basic needs of an individual is the need to be understood. This touches
the deepest feelings of the individual. To be understood is to be loved, liked and
accepted. To be not understood is to be treated as an alien. Understanding others
in a social situation as well as understanding oneself have been the prune concern
of human beings of all ages. Understanding is essentially the perception of another's
attitudes, meanings and feelings. To understand is to clearly grasp what is sought
to be understood—a person, object, event, idea or word. In a counselling situation
understanding has two connotations. First, it refers to the client's understanding of
himself and his situation or environment and, second, to the understanding of the
counsellor of the client's position or siuiation. The counsellor is able to understand
the feelings of the client and consequently the counsellor is able to follow the
client's mode of thought Gendlln (1961) has identified certain factors as important
characteristics of understanding:
1. Experiencing is felt rather than thought about and verbalized.
2. Experiencing occurs in the immediate present
3. Experiencing can be directly referred to by the individual.
4. Experiencing guides conceptualization.
5. Experiencing is implicitly meaningful.
The above categorization suggests different levels of understanding. Usually
four levels of understanding are identiGed. The fnst concerns knowledge about the
individual, thing, event, and so on. The second level consists of verbal and/or
operadonal understanding. The third concerns the understanding of one's own
perceptions, experiences, likes and dislikes. The fourth concerns self-understanding
and it may or may not be with the assistance of either internal or external perceptions.
Rapport
So far we have discussed factors or aspects that are external and also factors which
are largely influenced by the counsellor and his orientation philosophy and value
system. Apart from these, much of the success of counselling depends on counselling
skills or counsellor skiUs such as establishing rapport and empathy. Counselling is
a helping relationship that is carried on in a face-to-face and usually one-to-one
relationship. Rapport is an essential step in such a siuiation, which is more commonly
called the counselling interview. Rapport is a warm, friendly and understanding
conditioii which is essential for an effective relationship between the interviewer
and the interviewee. It is a relation that cannot be secu^ by force. It grows out
of the warmth of relationships and the desire on the part of the counsellor to
sympathetically understand the counsellee and the coimselIee*s cooperation in trying
to help the counsellor achieve a warm, friendly and trusting relationship. Rapport
is not one-sided. It is mutual and grows out of a cooperative effort It is often


--- PAGE 140 ---
120 CounsellingandGuidance
wrongly felt that ilie counsellor has a 'bag of tricks' which he uses to obtain
rapport Rapport determines the success or otherwise of an interview. It has not
•only to be secured but also sustained throughout the counselling process. The
sustenance of rapport is as important as its initial establishment. It is sustained
through the regard and trust the counsellee has for the counsellor. Even a small
feeling of doubt can mar the entire relationship. While most psychological phenomena
are measurable on some kind of psychological scale, rapport cannot stand scrutiny
on any scale of measuremenL Attempting to measure rapport would be like catching
a spinning top to feel what its motion is like. The very act of trying to feel the
motion puts an end to it If attention is drawn towards rapport, the counsellee can
become self-conscious or the counsellor can become embarrassed and rapport would
be lost. How then is one to establish and sustain rapport? This question has naturally
been a problem to counsellors. While no'thumb rules can be sensibly suggested we
can suggest certain positive factors that could help secure and maintain rapport.
Some of these factors are: (1) warmth of relationship, (2) communication of this
sense of warmth to the counseUee (not necessarily through verbal or such other
direct modes of communication), and (3) feelings of trust which grow out of
unconditicmal acceptance. Gestures, such as moving out to receive the client, greeting
him warmly, putting him at ease and directing his attention away from the problem,
are some of the basic techniques of establishing rapport Sensitiveness to the
counsellee's needs and moods can help to sustain rapport
Communication and Empathy
^unselling is, in a sense, reaching out into the psychological world of the client.The client may not be willing^ and even if willing, may not be able to communicateor give a glimpse of his psychological world to tJje counsellor. The counsellor has
not only to to reach out to tlie heart of the client but should also be able to
understand his deeper feelings. The method by which this can best be done is
through einpathy. Apathy is the capaciQ' to feel 'into* while sympathy is to feel
1^' understood by seeing how a mother feels when her.child is ill.The above statements suggest that empathy is an inier-relationship between two
people and this intcr-relationship borders on a sort of saaed relationship. According
to Rogers Q961), empathy is a necessary condition in counselling. Empathy, in his
words, is "to sense the client's private world as if it were your own, but without
ever losing the 'as if quality—this is empathy, and this seems essential to therapy.
To sense the client's anger, few, or confusion as it were your own, yet without your
own anger, fear, or confusion getting bound upon it, is the condition we are trying
to describe". From this descriptipni it will be seen that Rogers emphasizes
transposition. Empathy is not imitaiion. One does not do "exactly what the other
person does, yet one makes him.aware that one understands his thoughts, feelings,
and actions" (Shenzer and Stone, 1968).
Buchheimer identifies five dimensions of empathy. They are: (1) tone—the
expressive and non-verbal dimension conveying harmony and unity, (2) pace—the
appropriate timing of counsellor leads, (3) flexibility—the ability of the counsellor
to adapt himself to the counsellee's isituation, (4) perception of counsellee's frame
of reference, and (5) repertoire of leads—the resourcefulness of the counsellor to


--- PAGE 141 ---
CounselllngPfocess 121
vary his methods of approach. Thus in a counselling relationship empathy is the
counsellor's skill or capacity to view the counsellee's subjective world as if it were
his own.
Attcntiveness
Attentiveness is one of the important skills of the counsellor. To understand the
essence of the content and feeling expressed by the counsellee,. the counsellor
should be attentive while listening and observing.
In counselling, listening means more than what is meant in common parlance.
One may listen to a speech by a great orator. A student in a class may listen to a
lecturer. In both these instances the listening may be only nominal. However, in a
counselling siltiatipn mere listening is not enough and more is expected of the
counsellor. He should not limit himself to verbal communication. To secure and
establish a desirable counselling relationship he should also observe the non-verbal
behaviour of the counsellee, such as facial expressions, postures, gestures, inflections
in tone and periods of silence.
By listening and observing the counsellor sustains, extends and deepens his
knowledge of the counsellee. In other words, this helps him establish rapport and
gain insight into the psychological world of the client.
Counselling Relationship
The counselling relationship is the most important aspect of the counselling process.
However, it does not easily lend itself to a very clear definition. It conveys the
essential sense that there is an inter-personal relationship. It is a relationship of
mutual trust and confidence on the part of both the counsellee and the counsellor
and the concern for the well-being of the counsellee on the part of the counsellor.
There is an unconditional acceptance and a sense of commitment on the part of the
counsellor. Thus the counselling relationship encompasses the whole of the
counselling situation and affects its progress at every stage.
COUNSELLING PROCESS
(The term 'counselling process' implies continuous change or changes that take
^ace or rather which should take place ia the client in promoting personality
changes in a desired direction. The kind of change that the counselling process aims
at is briefly^J^ awareness on the part of the client, (2) behavioural change in adesired direction through which the client can achieve his goals, and (3) understanding
his potentialities, limitations and how to udlize them best in achieving his go^I^
^The counselling process, by and iargeriSihB"Saifl5"fEJf all problems and for all
Individuals. However, certain important differences need to be clarified. In vocational
and educational counselling the major emphasis is on collecting factual information
and helping the client understand this information in a proper perspecdv^In such
situadons the emodonal problems, though present, are not the main concern of the
counsellor. In educadonal and vocadonal counselling the decision-making and


--- PAGE 142 ---
122 CounsellliigandGuidance
planning model occupies the counsellor's attention such that he tries to help rational
problem-solving proc^ses, clarify self-concepts, values, etc. In this context
counsel!^ are olten concsned with the t^ropriate choice of educational goals or
careersQlie educational or vocational counselling usually proceeds in a stepwise
manner starting with (1) establishing a relationship, (2) stating the problem, (3)
elaborating and explaining the issues, (4) explcmng the relevant psychological aspects
of the counsellee's background, (S) structuring the nature of the process, (6) collecting
the needed data from tests, case material, personal documents, etc., (7) interpreting
the test data and individual appraisal, (8) discussing the data in the light of
occupational and/or educational choices of the client, (9) discussing alternate
^proaches or planed &ying out the plan(s), and (10) reassessing and, if necessary,
altering the plan(s) j
In the counselling of personal problems the psychotherapeutic model assumes a
somewhat different character. In ^is, information and planning in logical terms do
not play that central a role. The model is, by and large, unique for each counselling
situation and this uniqueness emerges partly from the uniqueness of the individual's
attitudes, interests, problems, etc., and also from the uniqueness of the counsellor's
e^riences, skills, etc. The general outline of the counselling model is (I) realizing
that-there is a complaint, problem or symptom (often people do not realize this),
(2) feeling the need for help in resolving the problem, (3) seeking help and
establishing the relationship (client-counsellor relationship), (4) expressing feelings,
clarifying and elaborating them as related to the problem(s), (5) exploring feelings
and personal resources, (6) being aware of the desirable direction of change, (7)
working through feelings and inducing the desirable change by means of
interpretation and reinforcement, (8) developing insights, (9) planning action, and
(10) implementing the action.
The above two models have much in common though they differ significantly
with regard to certain important elements. The former lays stress on the cognitive
aspects while the latter lays stress on the affective aspects.
Steps In tile Counselling Process
Stage I
The first stage is the awareness of need for help. Most individuals go about their
day-to-day lives without mucti awareness ot their situation and they appear to be
none the worse for it. Inwardly they may be experiencing suffering, yet they may
not seek help. Some individu^s experience their problems either because of their
severity or because someone close draws attention to the problems. Such individuals
are potential clients. They seek psychological asristance because of feelings of
distress. They lack the necessary competence and information to deal with them on
their own.
Stage //
The second important stage in coun^Iling consists of thedevelopment of relationship.
This can be viewed as a bridge connecting thSTJOunsellee's persoiiality witft tnat
of the counsellor's, penetrating through the outer defenses. The development of an


--- PAGE 143 ---
CounseJIIngProeess 123
emotionally waim and understanding relationship is the Hrst step in the counselling
relationship. It is characterized by mutual liking, trust and respect The counsellor
should be aware of the defense strategies likely to be exploited by the client
Usually the defense strategies fall under two basic kinds of manipulative devices:
O-Hite client may take a helpless attitude and get the counsellor to do what he
wants him K) do. and (2),.the counsellee may arouse sympathy and attentionand
avoid unpleasant tasks.'^By adopdrig either of these de^ceslfie cnihtsticcessfully
wai^ off the counselling relationship. He prevents it from breaking through his
out^ defenses. If, however, the counsellor succeeds in establishing this bridge then
he can establish optimal rapport which is sustained through the entire counselling
process.
SCa^e III
The third step in counselling is to aid the expression of feelings and clarification
of problems. In psychoanalytic terminology this is similar to 'catharsis'. In a sense,
it is a ventilation of feelings and the client experiences a feeling of relief consequent
to the release of tension. There is an awareness of relief from emotional stress
obtained through the communication of problems. A client may often obtain a
certain amount of courage in trying this technique with other feelings as well. In
this process, i^viously tied up emotions are released and can be tised constructively.
But this process has certain limitations. The client may obtain a false sense of the
resolution of conflict—ventilating his feelings may relieve him of tension and he
may very well mistake it for a state of resolution of tension. "
The expression of feelings not only helps in the release of emotional tensions
but can also help in clarifying problems. It is in this .sense that the expression of
feeling is of momentotis value in the counselling process.
Stage IV
The next stage comprises the exploration of deeper feelings. We have said in the
preceding section that the client may mistake ventilation of feelings for resolution
of feelings. It is necessary that the counsellor should not be ccmtent with a stq)erficial
view of the client's feelings. If therapeutic help is the objective, the counsellor must
try to explore the deeper feelings and conflicting situations which have not only to
be brought to the surface but also satisfactorily, resolved without damaging the
individual's personality. This step, therefore, involves analysis.
Stage V
The preceding stage logically leads to the next stage, comprising the integration
process. A proper appreciation of the feelings and underlying polarities can help
diffuse emotional tension and the counsellor can help the client see each feeling in
its prc^ perspective without either unduly exhibiting fear or withdrawal or showing
lack of concern. This stage, therefore, consists of working in close harmony with
the client with due understanding regard and sympathy for the client's innermost
feelings. In the course of such a process the counsellor is able to synthesize and
integrate counsellee potentialities, needs and aspirations and direct them towards
appropriate goals.


--- PAGE 144 ---
124 Counsellingand Guidance
Stage VI
The next stage, though not spell out very clearly, is concerned with the time
perspective. Clients usually are confused about their time pers^tive. They are not
able to see the present as logically arising from the past or the present affecting the
future. Naturally they appear baffled as they are unable to explain to themselves the
'how' and 'why' of things and usually come to grief.
Stage VII
This stage is one of developing the awareness of the counsellee. A number of coun
sellors and psychotherapists stress the importance of helping the client gain insight
into himself as well as insight into the world around him. This term, 'insight', is
usually used synonymously with awareness. Psychoanalytic therapy, for instance,
aims at providing insight into one's conflicts, repressions and inhibitions and when
once these are seen in their true perspective, they cease to be painful. London
(1964) is not quite in favour of this view, namely, that symptoms disappear with
self-knowledge, that is, when insight or awareness is obtained. He favours the
behavioural approach which stresses the importance of action. However, there is no
gainsaying the fact that the developing of awareness is of prime importance. Ellis
(1962) uses the terms intellectual and emotional insights. An intellectual insight,
that is, a rational understanding, is a prelude or necessary condition for emotional
insight For instance, a person experiences acute fear at the sight of a supposed
snake. When he realizes that the object is not a snake but only a rope (intellectual
insight) he sees the meaninglessness of his fear. In the psychotherapeutic process
the importance of awareness cannot be over-emphasized. There is another sense in
which awareness is used. It can refer to the awareness of goals—the direction in
which the self is to reach out or move forward.
Stage VIII
The last stage in counselling is generally the most crucial one in which the client
is encouraged to make use of the psychotherapeutic or counselling benefits he may
have gained to adjust himself to the world of realities. Therefore this stage is the
actual test to determine the success of counselling. If the client is not able to adapt
himself to his surroundings then we can infer that he has not gained much from
counselling. On the other hand, if the client is able to do so then we know that the
counselling has been successful. This stage marks the termination of counselling.
COUNSELLING INTERACTIONS
It would be helpful to discuss the types of inter-personal relationships that develop
in coimselling interviews so that we are aware of the complexities that may lie
beneath the surface of apparently simple behaviour.
In an interview with Mr. Datar, the counsellor, by systematic questioning, learned
that his choice of teaching was a rational one. But at the outset the counsellor had
assumed that he was going to help the client by assembling comprehensive test


--- PAGE 145 ---
CounsellingProcess 125
information which would enable him (client) make tiic appropriate vocational choice.
Test administration was found unnecessary, in this case, as the client had already
made a rational choice.
The interview between Mr. Singh and his counsellor shows another aspect of the
counsellor's style of functioning in relating himself to his clients. In this interview
the counsellor, unlike in the previous case, attempted to force interpretations and
concepts on the client. Mr. Singh's counsellor gave importance only to the
interpretation of feelings, that is, he was attempting to intellectualize the affective
experiences of the clienL Mr. Singh withdrew from counselling after a few sessions
"b^ause of the approaching public examinations". He appeared at this stage less
anxious but more realistic. The counsellor, however, believed that the client withdrew
prematurely owing perhaps to his dissatisfaction with the outcome of counselling
assistance.
After a few sessions with Mr. Naik a significant piece of vital information was
revealed that the client was dominated by his mother. In the current interview
sessions it was revealed that the client had been, in most of the early sessions, quite
passive and had not been playing his part. This was perhaps done because the
expression of direct affective experiences was not feasible. On gaining the necessaiy
insight the counsellor was able to draw the client's attention to the possible meaning
of his expressions and behaviour.
The counsellor assisting Miss Nair offered her a lead and helped her to express
and freely communicate her problem of not achieving a level appropriate to her
ability in college. The counsellor naturally hypothesized that there must be some
disturbing factor. In this interview the counsellor let tiie client recognize her problem.
The counsellor analyzed and helped her to recognize the reactions she had at
present and to pull together various aspects of her positive feelings. In the process,
she became aware of her negative feelings toward her situation. She realized and
understood tlie complexities of her feelings and her inability to work in accordance
with the demands of her situation.
Tlie hallmark of the therapeutic process is the capaciQ' on the part of the counsellor
to be sensitive to the reactions of his clients as well as to his own reactions to them.
The inter-personal process focuses on the sensitivity the counsellor must strive to
achieve for an intellectual understanding of his functions.
Limiting Counselling Relations
It is feasible for the psychological counsellor to make the counselling relationship
brief and yet induce emotional maturity in the case of people who are not extremely
maladjusted. The psychological counsellor generally tries to maintain brief
relationships with a large number of people rather than intensive relationships with
a few individuals.
Pressures Towards Extended Relationships
However, there are certain pressures on the counsellor to intensify relationships.
Demands for intense counselling relationships may emerge when the counsellor
desires to assist clients achieve their person^ity goals. The deep interest that the


--- PAGE 146 ---
126 Counsdilnsand Guidance
counsellor develops in inter-personal relationships to strengthen clients' feelings of
confidence may lead to intense and extended relationships whether they are
appropriate or not to the particular counselling goals.
Factors Contributing to Control of Relationship
The counsellor must be thorough with the methods of controlling the duration and
intensity of counselling relationships. This is achieved by;
1. Keeping the real problem injbcus—The counsellor tries to make the client
feel at ease in coming to terms with his many fears and anxieties which
have a bearing on the specific problem situation as he experiences it at the
present The counsellor discourages the client from deviations which could
lead him astray. He deals with the personality of the client as it affects his
decision process.
2. Selecting a criticalfacet of the conflict—It is often not easy for the counsellor
to initiate the th^peudc process quickly because sometimes clients approach
the counsellor without being aware of concrete problems. The counsellor in
such circumstances limits the duration of his relationship by focusing attention
on a particular aspect of the client's inner life. The process of centering on
one aspect of the client's motivations is guided by a general orientation
rather than a rigidly applied mode of action.
3. Giving more cognitive emphasis to interactions—^To keep the relationship
limited, it is necessary for the counsellor to avoid developing a vague
conception of the relationship. One way to foster activity is through
summarizing responses at the end of each counselling session, liie counsellor
could also indicate the possible new directions that could be explored in
future sessions.
4. Opening or commencing—The inexperienced counsellor experiences a
problem in starting the counselling and this initial stage largely determines
the nature of the relationship that develops in the future.
The counsellor has to be alert about the therapeutic orientation of his relationship
with the client while handling the beginning of a counselling session. The counsellor
at the beginning attempts to understand the communications of his client. Frequently,
with a large number of individuals who are unable to arrive at a definite therapeutic
orientation, the counsellor may have to extend the 'greeting' phase. If the counsellor
remains silent the client may respond by making some perfunctory statements.
However, if the client responds by remaining silent, the counsellor tries to understand
the meaning of his (client's) silence and communicates the idea that part of the
counselling task involves the client's acceptance of the initiative in the
communication process, especially at the beginning of the interviews.
The counsellor sometimes believes that feelings dealt with towards the end of
the sessions are important when the client is relatively free of the tensions that may
have been present at the commencement


--- PAGE 147 ---
Counselling Process 127
Endings, Intemiptlons and FolIow«up
There are certain characteristics which distinguish counselling from other forms of
psychotherapy. They are concerned with issues, such as problems of ending,
iniemiption and follow-up. The client may either interrupt or end the counselling
relationship ai soon as he or she feels well enough. The 'client's choice of timing'
to interrupt or end counselling depends on the interaction of factors, such as the
magnitude of his conflict, the potentialities for both immediate and long-time relief
offered by the resolution of a problem situation, the depth and accuracy of the
counsellor's understanding of the conflicts and the rapport which the counsellor
establishes with the client The lack of disclosure on the part of the client is an
inevitable characteristic of counselling relationships.
Interruptions in the counselling process are frequent. Some clients leave, saying
they will come back within a specified period of dme and some decide to discontinue
the relationship before reaching their goal. In many cases, the counsellor assumes
that the correct follow-up response is to be patient and to waiL
Preparing for Endilng
Counsellors, clients and psychotherapists alike, feel that the termination of counselling
is a difficult problem. In psychological counselling forced endings are frequent. A
relatively mature client understands that within a limited lime counselling has to
progress rapidly. Some clients are fearful about the termination of the counselling
sessions. In such circumstances the counsellor must be sensitive to the client's
reactions to separation. In any ending, whether forced or otherwise, the counsellor
must have a full understanding of the client's problems and needs so as to be able
to meet them effectively.
VARIABLES AFFECTING THE COUNSELLING PROCESS
Counsellor Variables
/. General Characteristics of Counsellors
The importance of the counsellor's attitudes to counselling outcomes cannot be
overemphasized. In order to identify the counsellor characteristics which are of
concern, investigators employed four approaches:
Speculation—^The question as to what the characteristics of an effective counsellor
are led to much speculadon. The Nadonal Vocadonal Guidance Associadon (1949)
listed such characterisdcs as interest in people, padence, sensitiveness, emotional
stabili^ and objectivity as being important for good counselling. Hamrin and Paulsen
(1950) listed the following characteristics: understanding, sympathetic attitude,
friendliness, sense of humour, stability, patience, objectivity, sincerity, tact, fairness,
tolerance, nearness, calmness, broadmindedness, kindliness, pleasantness, social
intelligence and poise. Mowrer (1951) believes that personal maturity is the most
important desirable characteristic for counsellors to progress. According to the
Associadon for Counsellor Education and Supervision, the counsellor should possess
six basic qualities: belief in each individual, commitment to individual human


--- PAGE 148 ---
1/g Counsellingand Cutdan^
values, alertness to the world, open-mindedness, understanding of self and
professional commitment. Parker (1966) holds that a counsellor should possess
such characterisdcs as sensitivity to others, ability to analyze objectively an
individual's strengths and weaknesses, awareness of the nature and extent of
individual differences and ability to identify learning difficulties.
Identifying effective and ineffective groups—Stefflre, King and Leafgren (1962)
fijund significant differences between the effective and ineffective counsellor samples
on the four dimensions studied, namely, academic promise, interests and values,
personality charactefist'cs and self-concepL The effective group obtained high scores
on academic aptitude and performance and scored higher on Social Welfare Scales
of Strong Vocational Interest Blank and Deference and Order Scores on Edwards
Personal Preference Schedule, than did the ineffective group.
Hypothesized characteristics—This approach is used to find out whether certain
characteristics that have been hypothesized as necessary for counselling are present
and functioning. Bandura 0956) tested the hypotheses that competent
psychother^ists are (I) less anxious than those judged to be less competent and (2)
possess greater insight into the nature of their own anxieties than do less competent
therapists. He concluded that "the presence of anxie^ in the therapist, whether
recognized or not, affects his ability to do successful psychotherapy and insight into
his anxieties alone is not sufficienL"'®
Correlational analysis—^The fourth r^roach consists in exploring the relationship
between counsellor variables and some criterion to measure the effectiveness derived
&om conelational analysis. Studies conducted by Johnson and her associates (1967)
indicated the following conclusions:
1. EffecUve male counsellor trainees were confident, friendly, affable, likable
and generally were satisfied with themselves and their surroundings.
2. Effective female counsellor candidates were outgoing, efficient and confident
They appeared to be assertive and were more person-oriented than object-
oriented
3. Effective male and female counsellor trainees showed similarities between
themselves and were more like each other than like their counterparts from
the less effective group.
The characteristics of counsellors are assessed, employing the self-report and
rating techniques. Four types of criteria are frequently employed, namely, supervisor
ratings, counsellor's peer ratings, client ratings and Q-techniques, to measure the
effectiveness of the counsellors.
In short, the effective counsellor was found to exhibit qualities such as tolerance,
maturity, understanding and an ability to maintain an appropriate emotional distance
from the counsellee. Variables, such as age, experience and sex also, to a certain
extent, affect the counselling process.
Age—Clients perceive their counsellors in different ways depending on the
coimsellor's age. If the counsellor is younger than the client, the latter will have
Bandura, "Psycholherapists' anxiety level self-insight and psycholherapoutic
ccmipetence", Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1956,52, pp. 333—337.


--- PAGE 149 ---
CounsellingProcess 129
less confidence in him. However, it is not desirable for a beginner in counselling
to attempt to alter his appearance and behaviour.
Experience—High correlations were obtained between experience and age. It
was found that counsellors improve with experience. The counsellors who work in
appropriate setdngs acquire experience through attending conferences, reading
professional books and journals and conducting research. Several investigations
(Fiedler, 1950a, 1950b; Strupp, 1955) revealed that the important differences between
experienced and inexperienced counsellors is with regard to flexibility. Experienced
counsellors behave in a more stable manner than do inexperienced counsellors.
Sex—^There is a general notion that male counsellors are preferred. Koile and
Bird (1956) and Fuller (1963,1964) concluded that female clients prefer to discuss
emotionally loaded problems with female counsellors. .With some clients the sex of
the counsellor may be important depending on the ease or difficult' with which
they can discuss their problems with male and female counsellors.
//. Personality Characteristics of die Counsellors
Several studies have attempted to determine the personality characteristics of
counsellors which are basic to effective counselling. Studies conducted by Tuma
and Gustad (1957) reveal that close similarities in the personalities of clients and
counsellors result in greater client learning. Mendelsohn and Geller (1965) obtained
a curvilinear relationship between client attitudes towards counselling and client-
counsellor personality similarity. This difference between the findings may be
attributed to the differences between the criteria employed by the two studies.
Weitz (1957), Snyder and Snyder (1961) and Tyler (1961) have suggested the
following traits of successful counsellors;
Interested in helping people—Some investigators have reported that a 'social
service need' is necessary for success and satisfection with a counselling job. Other
investigators like Steffire, King and Leafgren (1962), Mills, Chestnut and Hartzell
(1966) and Demos and Zuwaylif'(1966) found that counsellors liked people and are
interested in helping. This attitude makes the client feel comfortable in their presence.
Perceptual sensitivity—-Tixe counsellor should perceive and understand the
thoughts and feelings of the client and should be sensitive to the clues given by
him/her.
Personal adjustment—It is natural for counsellors, as any other individuals, to
have problems of adjustment Snyder (1961) stated that they should be 'normally
adjusted' but not necessarily 'perfectly adjusted'. The counsellor should be able to
cope with his problems in a constructive manner and should not attempt to try and
solve the problems of clients when he himself is facing difficulties.
Personal security—"Wdtz (1957) suggested that feelings of personal security is
another important factor. The counsellor may feel secure in his counselling role and
fed insecure in certain areas outside counselling. This indicates that the way he
conducts himself in a counselling situation is important and not the way he behaves
in ail life situations.
Genuineness—^The counsellor should establish a genuine relationship with his
clients by which they can achieve their counselling goals. Rogers (1958a) suggests
that the counsellor should be "a real person" to his clients.


--- PAGE 150 ---
J3Q CounseJHngandCu/dance
III. Counsellor Attitude and Bdlels
The nature of the counselling relationship depends to a large extent on the impa^^
of the counsellor's attitudes on the client
Beli^—^The dominant belief of the counsellor should be that the client be
treated with digni^, equality and individuality. The counsellor believes in the
worth and value of the counsellee. He believes in man's need for freedom and
liberty. Here liberty means the power to strive for goals without any external
constraints. In developing this characterisdc in the client the freedom to maho
appropriate choices is essential Many counsellors believe that counsellees have the
abili^ to deal efficiently with their problems.
Va/ues—Williamson (1958) points out that counsellors cannot be indifferent to
social and moral standards and should not try to be neutral. Samler (1960) states
that counsellors should be fully aware of their values, because a change in values
institutes an important counselling goal. According to Dreyfus (1967), 'humanness'>s the most important variable in counselling. Thecounsellw, however, is expected to
expose his values to the clients and not pretend as though he does not have any values.
Acceptance—A few writers classify accqjtance and understanding as techniques,and a few as attitudes. Rogos (1961) defines acceptance as "a warm regard for the
client as a person of unconditional self-worth and of value, no matter what his
condition, his behaviour or his feelings are". It implies respect and liking for the
chent as a person, a willingness to let him possess and express feelings in his ownway. 'It means an accqjtance of a regard for his attitudes of the moment, no matter
how negative or positive, no matter how much they may contradict other attitudeshe has held in the past" (Rogers, 1961)."
As 'acceptance' isof considerable importance several writers have discussed its
charactwistics at some length. According to Tyler (1961), the two basic componentso acceptance are (1) willingness to let individuals differ from one another in th^haviour and (2) realizatton that the experience of each person comprises a complexpattern of striving, thinking and feeling. This appreciation of the clients grows out
? rt- ^ 'Counsellor's non-judgemental attitude. Acceptance implies helping ann vidual and not controlling him. In order.to accept the counsellee the counsellor
uccept and understand himself.
t/nderwanding—Tyler (1961) defines understanding as the ability to "grasp clearlyM completely the meaning the client is trying to convey". Fiedler (1950) stresses
6 unportance of understanding in the counselling process. He holds that the
wunsellor should be able to participate completely in the client's communications.
® comments should harmonize with what the client is trying to convey. ThecounMljor should understaiid the cUent's feelings and should follow the client'sime of thought Davis (1963) identifies four levels of understanding. They comprise:
(1) Joiowledge about anotha individual, his behaviour, personality, and intents,
w intellectual understanding and a behavioural or operationalunderstanding, (3) knowledge of the individual's internal world, his fears, loves andalettes and (4) self-imderstanding. In a counselling situation, all the four levelsof understanding are involved.
^■R. Rogers, On Becoming a Person, Boston, Houghlon Mifflin, 1961.


--- PAGE 151 ---
CounsemngProcess 131
COUNSELLOR'S SKILLS
Rapport, empathy and attentiveness are the three skUIs which can either facilitate
or inhibit the counselling process. These skills are closely related to acceptance and
understanding.
Rapport—Shertzer and Stone (1968) define report as an essential condition for
a comfortable and unconditional relationship between the counsellor and counsetlee.
Rapport means interest, responsiveness and sensitive emotional involvement.
Counsellors use rapport as a technique in the initial stage of the interview to put
the counsellee at ease. Through rapport the counsellor understands and communicates
with the client from the commencement to the end of the interview.
Taking the counsellee's needs, moods and conflicts into consideration the
counsellor establishes rapport. To help him discuss his feelings f^ly the counsellor
tries to be friendly and attentive. For the establishment of good rapport there is
need for coimsellor skills and abilities, such as versatility, flexibility and reliability.
Empathy—Empathy means 'feeling into* and has a significant role in the
counselling situation. Empathy is referred to as the apprehension rather than the
mere comprehension of the emotions of another person without feeling completely
what he feels. It is "the ability to feel and describe the thoughts and feelings of
others" (Dymond, 1949). She further describes empathy as "the imaginative
transposing of oneself into the thinking, feeling and acting of another and so
structuring the world as he does".
Rogers (1962) lays emphasis on transposition rather than empathy.
PORTRAIT OF AN EHECTIVE COUNSULOR
The three aspects by which an effective counsellor can be distinguished hum an
ineffective one are experience, type of relationship established and non-intellective
factors.
Experience—^Fiedler's (1950,1951) studies reveal that counsellors who are well
trained agree with each other about their concept of an ideal therapeutic relationship.
According to Rogers (1962) also, more experienced counsellors o^er more
congruence and empathy and they are more successful in communicating with their
clients.
Type of counselling relationship—The ability to communicate and understand
their clients, maintain an appropriate emotional distance and divest themselves of
status concerns in regard to their clients characteri^ efficient counsellors (Redler,
1950,1951).
Non-intellective fiictors—Tht effective counsellor exhibits tolerance for ambigui^,
understanding (of the client), maturity, and ability to establish good social
relationships with clients and non-clients. Wicas and h^an (1966) found that
'high rated' counsellors were anxious, sensitive to the expectations of others and
society, patient and non-aggressive in inter-personal relationships and showed
appropriate self-control.


--- PAGE 152 ---
132 CounseBIngand Guidance
COUNSELUE FACTORS
The counselling outcomes can also be affected by counsellee characteristics, such
as counsellee expectations and readiness to communicate and to respond. The
involvement of the counsellee and his readiness to change are related to his
improvement (Cartwright and Leraer, 1963). Counsellee likability was found to be
related to success in therapy (Stoler, 1963). Introverted counsellees with greater
tolerance for ambiguiQr have greater promise of better results (Conrad, 1954). The
degree of dependency expressed by clients was found to be related to the degree
of support provided by counsellors (Schuldt, 1966).
The congruence between the counsellor and counsellee was found to have a
curvilinear relationship to "favourable outcomes of therapy" (Gerler, 1958).
Counsellee-counsellor compatibility was reported to have a positive correlation of
0.45 with counselling outcomes. Sapoldcy (1965) concludes that the "effect on
outcome of treatmwil appeared to have occurred through the differential effect the
compatibility variable had on the way the therapist was perceived by the patient".
Heller, Myers and Kline (1963) tested five hypotheses, namely, that (1) dominant
client behaviour will evoke dqwndent interviewer behaviour, (2) dependent client
behaviour will evoke dominant interviewer behaviour; (3) hostile client behaviourwill evoke hostile interviewer behaviour, (4) friendly client behaviour will evoke
frie^ly interviewer behaviour and (5) hostile client behaviour will evoke interviewer
anxie^r. The first four hypotheses were supported by the data obtained.
SUMMARY
The counsellor may feel that he must help the counsellee to have more trust In
him (raunsellor) so that he (counsellee) can become less anxious and not avoid
®^ressl^somethlng significant.Three kinds of process goals are seen as appropriate for most counsellees.They are (1) establishment of relationship, (2) self-examlnatlon and awareness
and (3) fadlltatlon. Counselling may be seen as a process ha>ring a series of
stages. Counselling be^ns when a person approaches a counsellor, for help in
dealing v4th a problematic situation or making an Important dedslon. The essentialprocess goals of die first counselling session Include stimulating, open, honest
and full communication about the Immediate problems and the related factors In
the background, working progressively towards deeper levels of understanding
based on respect and dust between the counsellee and counsellor. Issues and
concerns related to establbhlng trust; the role of caring and acceptance; and
active listening to help responses that block or fedlltate communication, become
Identified. Apathy Is a qualiV ^bat stimulates open communication and In-depth exploration of discord, without attempting to over-slmpIlfy the process.
The stages In the process of ^rapeutic counselling are Identified as developingthe relationship, expressing the fedlngs, darling die problem, working through
the feelings, developing Insight and planning action.
Three critical points are identified In the Intermediate stages of the process:
(1) the desire to leave after the first satis^ng catharsis of feelings, (2) too fest
and too deep expression of feelings and (3) tendency to leave counselling


--- PAGE 153 ---
Counselling Process 133
before the completely working through Ae problem to the point of achieving
positive action.
At the outset the counsellor Is confronted with three prepaiatoiy concerns.
First, he must fece the problem of readiness on the part of the counsellee or
motivation for counselling. This Is a key qmptom In working with ciJl the
counsellees. The second concerns acquiring the necessary Information for a
case-study. This Is expressed by die question. "What are the relevant data
needed to help the client?" Various sources of data, such as case history and
cumulative records are available. The dilrd concern of the counsellor Is the form
and extent of his diagnostic formulation. E^agnosls Is a means of describing
causation and predlctlrrg future behaviour. However, the diagnostic thinking
process has severe limitations.
Therapetitic effectiveness rewoh/esvery much on the quality ofthe relationship
between the counsellor and the client; hence the ba^c attitudes of the cotmsellor
are highly significant. The attitude of acceptance and understanding Is Important
for creating the appropriate p^cholo^cal climate for a p^chological Interview.
The counsellor should communicate the feelings of warmth and flexibility eind
exhibit responslblll^ and willingness to listen and help. One of die principal
ftmctlons of the reladonshlp Is to gjve support, by which Is meant die promotion
of feelings of security and comfort In die counsellee so diat he responds openly.
The techniques for Implementing the basic principles of relationships are clasdfled
as opening, reflecting, accepting, structuring, pausing. leading, reassuring and
terminating. Each has Its unique value as well as limitation for creating the
optimal kind of relationship necessary for the development of insight and self-
actuallzatlon.


--- PAGE 154 ---
PBycIti0l@gicMl Testing sind
DlsiMnosls
INTRODUCnON
In counseUing, infonnation regarding the personality assets and liabilities of the
counsellees is a helpful point of departure. In the preliminary interview the counsellor
can secure some information that would help in understanding the counsellee's
problems. In the course of the counseUing sessions the counsellor may feel the need
for objective information. At this stage the need for using psychological tests may
be indicated. Often, along with the test data, information from non-test data, such
as case-study, cumulative records and such other information may be used for
diagnostic purposes. Tests can also be used to assess the counsellee's initial
psychological status such that the progress made during the counseUing sessionscan be evaluated.
The relation between the use of tests and psychological counselling has been far
from new, controversial or cordial. Everyone is chary of tests which are regarded
^ 'an invasion of privacy' of the individual. Testing, some counsellors hold, is
inconsistent wth the non-judgemental and non-threatening atmosphere consideredbaste to positive counselUng. Tests, according to some, create an elitist attitude and
do not r^y add to what is already known about the counsellee.
Notwithstanding the very critical attitude of some counsellors, major approachesto counselUng consider tests to serve a very useful purpose. The trait-and-factor
approach places a lot of faith in psychological tests. We shaU consider the use of
psycholo^cal tests in counseUing as diagnostic aids. We shall also discuss the non-t^t techniques as providing information useful in the understanding and diagnosis
of counsellees* problems.
The m^ical model of counselling assumes that adjustment problems are
'^presentations of underlying factors deep in the psychodynamic system.^ e belief is that such a model would not only be representative but also usefulm providing orientation. The postulates of the medical model are hotly contested
by other counsellors who prefer to use the behavioural model which does not
burden itself wiUi a consideration of the underlying depth factors. Irrespective of
the type of model one may have in mind, reliable devices are much in demand for
psychodiagnosis. The counseUor often looks upon the psychological tests as hisbasic tools in the therapeutic process. The major use psychological tests are put to


--- PAGE 155 ---
P^chological Testing andDiagnosis 135
is in diagnosis. While the importance of tests in diagnosis cannot be underestimated,
it is an equally important fact that psychological tests are useful in the evaluation
of counselling outcomes. Apart from diagnostic and evaluative uses, psychological
tests are also used in other situations involving prediction and the acquisition of
information.
A psychological test is a tool'developed for a specific purpose to be used with
a defined population. Great care is taken in establishing its psychometric properties.
Thus, a psychological test is for all practical purposes considered as an objective
test providing dependable information. This claim is hotly contested and we shall
return to it at a later stage. Psychological tests are based on the theory that they are
comparable to objective observations and that they sample the defined psychological
'trait-universe' from a wide range of respondent behaviour. Psychological tests can
also be used in providing self-knowledge. Most self-administering tests fall under
this category. Such tests purport to provide an unbiased objective understanding of
oneself.
The second use of psychological tests is for screening. This is a very useful
device and helps in conserving lime and energy. The obvious purpose of such tests
is to help determine whether individuals have any problem and, therefore, require
assistance. Naturally such an aid lightens the burden of the counsellors to a great
deal in so far as they identify those clients who require assistance. Screening tests
are usually not very elaborate. They are usually meant to provide tentative information
and it is undesirable for the counsellor to have complete faith on such interim
findings. Often individuals are not aware of their own situation (problems). A
screening device, therefore, is of very great value. Psychological tests are also used
as aids in the prediction of the future success of the testee. In such situations
usually more than one test is combined on the basis of certain objective criteria.
Most aptitude tests are used as predictor tests.
The most important clinical use of psychological tests is in the field of
psychodiagnosis. Several diagnostic personality tests like the Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory (MMPI) and ability tests like the Weschler Adult Intelligence
Scale (WAIS) are extensively used. In addition, projective tests are used with the
speciHc intSntion of diagnosis.
An important use of the psychological tests is to assist the counsellor in the
process of therapy. This corresponds to the practice of obtaining information from
clinical tests in the medical situation to assess the progress of therapy. Psychological
tests are also used in evaluating counselling outcomes. While other evaluative
criteria can also be used, the psychological evaluation perhaps can best.be done by
employing standard psychological tests.
UMITATIONS OF THE USE OF PSYCHOLOGICAL TESTS
1. Most psychological tests are developed for use with specific populations
and for definite purposes. The use of such tests with other subjects and for
other purposes appears to be a highly questionable practice.
2. Psychological tests usually yield scores that have to be interpreted in terms


--- PAGE 156 ---
jjg Comselllnssnd Guldants
of certain norms. Applying the norms derived from one population to subjectsdrawn from another population is not a tenable pracUce.
3. It is weU known that no single measure can ever be fool-proof. It is. theretore,suggested that instead of using a single test, it is desirable to combme anumber of such tests to yield a composite score which would be more
dependable than the information obtained through a single test While this
is apparently an attractive proposition it should not be forgotten that thereare serious problems in combining test scores that require very sophisucatedstatistical as well as psychometric training.
TYPES OF FSYCHOLOaCAL TESTS
Psychological tests broadly fall under three categories, namely, personality; ability
and aptitude; and attitudes and interests. There is another category of tests that is
widely used and popular in the field of education. These tests are scholastic
achievement tests. Basically, achievement tests are not psychological tests but
psychological principles are used in their construction, validation and standardization.
In the field of counselling there may be a situation indicating the need for using one
or another type of psycholopcal test. Also, the use of psychological tests is contra-
indicated in specific situations. The counsellor has, th^fore, the professional and
ethical responsibility to choose the appropriate psychological tesL
There are individuals who have us^ some tests and not found them reliable and
they generalize from this experience and make universal statements concerning the
general unreliability of ptychological tests. There are others who have found a test
useful in some situations and they believe that the test can be useful in other
situations as well. It is one of the basic assumptions of psychologists that
psychological tests are specific to the situation for which they are designed and
us^ul with the specified population with whom they are yalidat^ and standardized.
Individuals who fail to appreciate this genially make either sweeping positive or
negative statements concerning the tests.
The second misconception is regarding the infallibility of tests. Tliis again is
unfortunate because in the order, of things there can be nothing which can be
considered perfect or infallible. Test users have to guard themselves against possible
over-reaction or enthusiasm which could blind them to certain realities. Tests do
fail and they fail for a variety of reasons. They M firstly because of the limitations
of the test itself, secondly owing to the testee and his altitudes, thirdly owing to the
tester or the test administrator and lastly owing to the test situation.
Psychologic^ tests are objective devices designed and developed with great care
on the basis of sound psychometric principles. While this is gennally true, not all
tests made available commercially, follow this rigorous procedure and, therefore,
cannot be taken at face value. The test user has a great responsibility in the choice
of the test appropriate to the given situation. The test user depends largely on the
norms report^ by the test constructor. He has to examine the available norms
before he decides whether or not to use the test A few psychological tests have
been developed for use in clinical situations.


--- PAGE 157 ---
P^fcholosieal TestingandDU^gnosIs 137
There is some controversy over the statistical or clinical interpretation of tests.
The projective tests, for example, do not lend themselves to actuarial use. They are
meant to be used idcographically. In the case of personality tests there are three
basic categories of tests, namely, check lists, omnibus personality inventories
(multidimensional tests) and factored tests. Check lists cannot be compared with
the factored tests with regard to the sophistication of techniques of test development
The Mooney F^blem Check List or the problem check lists developed by several
psychologists or researchers are meant to provide a preliminary evaluation. They
are meant as screening devices and nothing more. Since they are check lists which
require the testee to indicate a particular problem the latter may not be forthcoming.
Thus the testee can withhold information because of the transparency of the test.
Personality tests of the questionnaire kind can be faked by the testee. But it is
always assumed that the testee is giving a candid response. Yet the question whether
the various tests actually measure what they purport to do remains a crucial issue.
The scoring system also allows for variations and errors. The factored tests, on the
other hand, claim to have overcome these two possible limitations of the tests.
Questionnaires, inventories and the like cannot exhaust the repertoire of the individual
response system. One often feels the limitation of answering within a 'straight-
jacket' response category. For example, to the question, "Do you feel shy?" the
three response categories "Yes", "No" or"?" do not exhaust other possibilities. The
projective tests claim two specific advantages over the personality questionnaires
or inventories. They provide unlimited scope for response and they are not
transparent. But the advantages thus secured by the projecdve tests are not without
drawbacks. They make the problems of scoring and interpretation insuperable, in
addition to introducing an element of subjectivism which is anathema to the normative
scientist.
FACTORS AFFECTING PSYCHOLOGICAL TEST RESULTS
The testce-tester attitude fundamentally affects test results. There could be two
categories of tcstees: the naive and the experienced. Some individuals have taken
so many tests during their life time that they understand the 'testee responsibility*.
They need little assistance from the tester for they (testees) understand the objectives.
Most testees are naive and strangers to the test situation. They require much help
from the counsellor. They may have a number of apprehensions that would have
to be dispelled. A testee may have certain attitudes or objectives, expressed or
otherwise, regarding test taking. If the testee's goal is self-understanding or self-
knowledge he will be candid and hot be^disposed to distort his responses. If his
objective is to make a favourable impression, or at least not an unfavourable one,
he may respond keeping the social desirability value in mind. He may fake or
distort his responses.
Verbal psj^hological tests ci^te another problem of comprehension for the
testee. Most psychological t^ts are 'culture loaded' and the expressions and idiom
may be quite unfamiliar. Fdr 'example, the apparently simple question, "Are you
often in the blues?" poses some difficulty to a testee with limited linguistic skills


--- PAGE 158 ---
138 Counselllngand Guidance
of comprehension. An item like, "Do you 'gauffaw' a lot?" is often incomprehensible
to a testee. Here it is not a question of limited vocabulary of the testee. Standard
English dictionaries do not list this word for it is not an English word. Naturally
some testees would be at a loss. Furthermore, some tests require efficiency of
performance while others are concerned with ability. Usually speed tests place
certain categories of subjects at a disadvantage.
For test administration and-usage.of tests the role of the tester is fundamental.
Several conditions are prescribed by psychologists for the proper use of tests. The
first responsibili^ of the tester is thk he should know the tests thoroughly. The
tester must be very clear in his mind with regard to the objective of testing—why
he-wants to use the test. Once this is determined he can choose appropriately from
an array of available tests. In this context he is like a medical practitioner who
chooses one particular drug rather than another because he knows what the two
drugs contain, how they act and what particular action he desires. The counsellor
chooses one test in preference to another on the basis of his knowledge of the tests
concemed and his objectives, that is, what he expects liom the tesL The choice of
a test is important, but the more important issue is of interpretation. A counsellor
is dealing with sensitive human beings. Their self-images should not be impaired.
At the same time he cannot give a wrong impression in order to preserve the self-
image of the individual. For instance, a testee believes that he has an aptitude for
a particular learning. The counsellor obtains results that belie this fond assumption.
What the counsellor should do in this situation concerns the basic professional and
ethical issues. Should he tell the truth and hurt the client? Or should he let the client
nurture his false belief complacently?
No test is infallible. The counsellor knows this important truth more than any
one else. Th^fore, he must use the test to supplement and complement other
available informadon. Perhaps he can use several tests. This brings up the issue of
combining test data. For instance, a pupil secures the grades B* in science, C in
humanities, B in languages, and so on. How should this be interpreted? Could it be
assumed that the pupil is above average, or average, or below average? There is the
question of a ftame of referwice which refers to the 'norms' appropriate to the
testee. A lest yields a numerical score, usually called the raw score, which is not
meaningful in itself. How should the counsellor interpret this raw score? Obviously
he has to interpret it in terms of a frame of reference or 'norms' applicable to the
testee. However exhaustive the i.orms may be, it cannot be assumed that an
appropriate frame of reference is available.
A counsellor should always voify the test results. This, we know, is a common
and simple scientific rigour. But verify how and with what? Physical measures can
be verified ad infmitum granting the padence of the verifier. The human individual
is not just a physical endty. Readministradon of the tests does not give the same
results because of a modification of the individual's experience during the intervening
time as a result of his taking the tests or owing to some other factors that may have
affected him. In vocational selection, and to some extent in xademic situations,
tests are used for predicting future performance. Most aptitude tests fall under this
category. If a test result can be verified in terms of its predicted value, we have a
measure of verifiability. But this is not immediately available.


--- PAGE 159 ---
P^chologlcal TestingandDiagnosis 139
Another important counsellor function in test administration is counsellor
neutrality which is once again a very iiksome matter. For instance, a subject performs
well in a given test and the counsellor may say, "you have done well", or when a
client fares poorly the counsellor may say to the client, "you have done poorly".
Either of these statements does not indicate counsellor neutrality. An experienced
counsellor could perhaps say that the client's performance is in the range of the top
quartile or is in the range of the lower quartile and so on. Among the other things
that the counsellor has to take care of is the meaningfulness of test interpretation.
What we have said" in the preceding lines is an example in point. The testee may
not imderstand expressions such as top quartile and lower quartile. An inteip'etation
should be clear and understandable to the testee.
Test performance can be considerably affected by the test situation. Certain
aspects of this can be controlled while certain others are beyond control. The basic
requirements of objective testing are (1) the testee must be physically comfortable,
(2) he should be appropriately motivated and (3) he should be willing to cooperate.
The tester on his part is expected to be patient, friendly, warm and understanding.
TEST USE IN COUNSaUNG SITUATIONS
Tests are used in counselling for several purposes, the foremost being diagnosis.
There are a munber of psychological tests avowedly designed for diagnostic use.
Some tests are used as self-evaluative devices. Many self-administering tests like
the Allport Vemon-Lindzey Study of Values fall under this category. Tests are also
designed for self-discovery and understanding, for example, the Strong Vocational
Interest Blank (1943).
A number of clinicians have warned against many pitfalls in test usage. Brammer
and Shostrom (1968) list the following cautions in the use of tests in diagnosis:
1. Not U) overstretch when the test data are incomplete and inaccurate.
2. Not to overemphasize the test results to the neglect of present attitudes and
current behaviour of the client
3. Not to administer psychological tests too quickly to facilitate diagnosis
without paying attention to other available information.
4. Not to lose sight of the counsellee's total personality and become preoccupied
with morbidity rath^ than healthy behaviour.
5. Not to assume a judgemental attitude toward the client.^
Counselling approaches differ significantly with regard to their attitudes to test
usage. Rogers (1951) stands at one extreme with his rejection of using tests in
counselling. He believes that tests can act like blinkers. The counsellor may become
a prisoner of his own test data and refuse to see beyond it. Rogers, therefore, is
averse to the use of tests. Williamson's (1950) position is perhaps at the other
extre^ne. In keeping with the Minnesota tradition, Williamson stresses that tests are
2®Lawrence M., Brammer and Everett L. Shostrom. Therapeutic Psychology, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ., ftentice-Hall, 1960, pp. 135—137.


--- PAGE 160 ---
140 Counselllnssnd Guidance
necessary aids in counselling. He believes that the clients have to be given objective
information concerning their personality, abili^, aptitudes, attitudes and interests.
The counsellor has to administer the appropriate tests and diagnose the problem on
the basis of test data. Thome (1950), the leading figure of the eclectic school, takes
a middle-of-the-road point of view. The authoritarian counsellors, namely,
psychoanalysts, do not believe in the utility of tests but do not object to using
projective tests. Wolpe and his associates (1958) as well as the behaviour therapists
are for the limited use of tests. The existential counsellors also follow a similar
approach.
Certain harmful consequences of tests have been cited. Ebel (1963) suggests that
test data may lead to erroneous opinions, such as that of a child being superior,
mediocre or inferior which can have an indelible effect on the child and do irreparable
harm to his self-esteem and motivation. Test scores, if not carefully used, can lead
to a narrow conception of abili^ and stultify the potential growth of the individual.
The tests can place the testers in a position of determining the destinies of human
beings. They (tests) may lead to an impersonal, inflexible, mechanistic attitude
towards human beings and their performance.
In recent times, test use has become so commonplace that clients are not satisfied
if they are not administered at least a few tests. Sometimes they even ask for
specific tests to be administered to them. This opens a new problem, namely, client
p^cipation in test selection. Should the counsellor choose the tests in consultationwith the counsellee or should he act independently? Those antagonistic to this view
argue that just as a physician does not consult his client as to what drug he should
prescribe, the counsellor should choose the test on the basis of his clinical judgement
of its utility. They also point to the important fact that the client is not as informed
as the counsellor to wisely and meaningfully choose the appropripie test. On the
other hand, the idea that the client should be consulted implies , that he knows
something, if not as much, of the test usage as the counsellor. The protagonists of
this view argue that counselling, being dirwted towards the self-understanding of
the client, should ensure maximum involvement of the client in the counselling
process. Consultation in test selection would thus be a fruitful avenue for client
involvement. Even if the clients do not have much significant knowledge about thetests nothing is lost in consulting them. This approach promotes the major goal of
counselling, namely, self-direction and self-dependence.
There are other practical problems which may perhaps be of interest here. It ts
argued that some clients could be sensitive to the extent that when a test is Introduced,
they may not return for further interviews. Indecisiveness on the part of the client,
resistance to the use of tests and the like could be valuable aids in counselling
which no counsellor would fail to make use of. By letting the clients know the
purpose of testing and explaining to them the goils of test administration they
could be emotionally prepared to take the tests. The client's reactions and suggesti^s
may not only help choose a more suitable test but also provide other information
that could be used to advantage in counselling.
Goldman (1961) cites some practical arguments against the client's participationin the selection of test. According to him:


--- PAGE 161 ---
P^fchologlcaJTestlrtgandDiagnosis <41
1. Client participation in test selection is really "much ado about nothing". It
makes little difference what process is used (client participation or no
participation) so long as the most appropriate tests are administered.
2. The client is usually too emotionally involved with his problem to make
objective decisions regarding the choice of appropffiate tests. Seeman (1948)
found that college students who selected tests themselves did not significantly
differ from those who did not choose tests themselves. The findings of
Gustad and Tuma (1957) also support Secman's findings.
TEST INTERFRETATION IN COUNSELLING
After a test is chosen and administered, the next vital step is the interpretation of
test results. No client is content or satisfied unless he is given a sort of 'low down*
regarding his performance. Several research studies indicate that the contextual
factors in the interpretation of test data are of great significance. The counsellor
may discuss the test results individually or in groups. Several findings suggest that
the interpretation of test results in groups is sometimes more effective. Similarly,
the discussion of test results individually is effective in certain other situations.
Testees who received no test interpretation (control subjects or group) did not show
any improvement in their understanding or behaviour. In the case of educational
tests, such as scholastic or academic achievement, and vocational tests, such as
vocational inventories, interest tests and aptitude batteries, interpretadon in groups
was found to be more effective. In the case of personality tests; such as self^concept
and ideal self-perception, interpretation in a group situation was not found to be as
efiective ^ individual interpretation.
Goldman (1961) idendfies four dimensions of test interpretadon:
1. Descripdve—^It essendally provides, as the term indicates, descripdve
informadon. How the subject Compares with oth^, his likes and dislikes,
whether he is sociable or likes to be left alone, and so on, are descripdve
of human nauire and largely depend on the construct, content and concurrent
validities of the tests administered.
2. Genetic—^The test data are interpreted in order to show the 'how' and 'why'
of the subject's behaviour or experience. In short, they show how he came
to be what he is. In this type of interpretadon, the counsellor generally uses
the ex postfacto approach. He employs, in other words, predictive validities
for indicating what happened in the past, that is, indications as to what
happened previously are inferred from the present scores. To illustrate this
from the medical field we may cite the example of a physician looking at
an ECG and inferring from it that the subject has sufiered a heart attack in
the past
3. Predictive—In this kind of interpretation the counsellor Cries to explain what
is likely to happen in the future on the basis of the present test scores. For
example, a low scholastic aptitude test score may indicate that the student
may not bu able to fare creditably at college. In this form of interpretation
too predictive validity is used.


--- PAGE 162 ---
142 Counsellingand Guidance
4. Evaluative—In the previous three QTpes of interpretations the counsellor
does not try to go beyond the test data. He merely interprets them as they
are: descriptively, genetically or postdictively, that is, to infer about the
past In evaluative interpretation the counsellor has to go beyond the test
data. He may have to make a specific suggestion, recommendation or give
professional advice. Th^fore, this type of interpretation differs from the
rest It is not based on any particular ^pe of validity but it concerns the
terms on the basis of which the counsellor makes his recommendation. As
far as educational and vocational areas are concerned one of the best
approaches is to use expectancy tables. These may be available ready-made
or the counsellor may construct them. An expectancy table is a table of
norms. It is based on empirical information. For example, suppose the subjects
have taken test X. The distnbution of the subjects' achievements in terms
of percentages or grades may be shown corresponding to the obtained test
scores. From such a table, it would be easy to read off the performance of
a subject whose test score was in the range of 31 to 40 or 51 to 60, and so
on. In test development this particular technique was used by Strong Jr. in
developing his Strong Vocational Interest Blank (SVIB). He obtained the
interest patterns of specific occupational groups—doctors, engineers,
accountants, lawyers, teachers and so on. Next he compiled the interests of
the 'men in general' group. He then compared the specific interest patterns
of the two groups. It is easy to see whether a given subject falls within the
specific occupational group or within the men in general group or somewhere
in between. If the subject's scores compare favourably with those of the
specific occupational group it can be inferred that the subject has an interest
pattern that is most akin to the particular occupational group. It is, therefore,
reasonable to conclude that the subject will be successful in the occupation
concerned. Thus expectancy tables can be very valuable in providing
evaluative interpretation.
Bym (1968) has recommended a number of desirable approaches in test
interpretation in his paper The Test Interpretation—Planning Interview. He suggests
that the counsellor would do well to:
1. Have confidence in the client's planning ability, even if he has shown little
of it. The counsellor could say, "What other infoimation do you need about
yourself before you decide?" instead of saying. "May be we could see what
the results of this test, X, would be".
2 Relate the client's immediate or proximate ideas and actions to his remote,
distant or future plans. The counsellor would do well not to separate the
present from the future and treat them independenUy. For in the client's life,
the present and future would form a single continuum, dynamically and
causdly related to each other. The counsellor could say. "What can you do
this year in school to prepare for entering college in the coming year?"instead of, "Your marks are not so good now but you have good aptitude
for college work".
3 Make alternative plans look plausible and as far as possible comparable.


--- PAGE 163 ---
Psycholo^ealTestingandDlagnosIs 143
The counsellor could say, "If your plan does not happen to woik out what
else could you do?" and not, "If you fail in engineering yoii could perhaps
take to drafting".
4. Encourage the client to make his own plans rather than agree to the
counsellor's. The counsellor could say, "How do you plan to go about doing
this?" and not, "It appears to me that you have got to do this".
5. Try to introduce new educational and vocational avenues and not close
them to the student Ibe counsellor could say, "There are ten thousand jobs
besides medicine or engineering, perhaps you could qualify for many of
them" instead of, "You won't be able to enter medicine or engineering with
your low marks".
6. Relate the test data to the other experiences of the clioit The counsellor
should, never discuss test data in abstraction. He could say, "How does this
fit in with your experiences?"instead of, "Your interests look very much
like this".
7. Reflect on a client's rejection of low test scores and not just write them off
as low p^ormance. The counsellor could say, "You don't think this is your
real ability? What other clues do you have?" instead of 'Tests are not fool
proof. There could be an error".
8. Involve clients in test interpretation. Do not just read out the results. The
counsellor could say, "What did you think of the tests? How do you suppose
you did?" instead of, "On this lest your score is—".
9. Explain the purpose of the test in the manner he can understand, not in
counsellor's or psychologist's jargon. The counsellor could say, "This test
helps you to compare yourself with high school students of atove average
ability" and not, "This is test "X'. This measures numerical ability".
10. Use test results in relation to all other available information. The test data
are not goals in themselves. The counsellor could say, "Now that you have
this test information, add everything else you know about yourself instead
of, "According to this test score you could do well in mechanical work".
11. Use test results for planning for the client and not just for counsellor's
diagnosis (client-centered not counsellor-centered approach). The counsellor
could say, "This test helps you compare yourself with other students in the
ability to leam" instead of, "This test score confirms my hypothesis/hunch
that you can succeed in college".
12. Relate test data to school record (cumulative record) and do not look only
at the test results. The counsellor could say, "With your ability you should
be able to secure a first class or a high second class with average, effort",
instead of, "Your marks have not been good but you have high aptitude for
collegiate work".
13. Refresh the counsellee's memory. Do not discuss the test results by
themselves in a cold manner. The counsellor could say, 'Remember the test
you vooki about the things you liked best and liked least?" instead of, "On
Kuder you were high on persuasive and mechanical and low on anistic'\
14. Explain the test results in a matter-of-fact fashion. Do not introduce statistical
description. The counsellor could say, "This score is high, this one is low


--- PAGE 164 ---
144 CounsellingandGuidance
and this one is average for engineering students. Your performance Is about
this" instead of. "You fall within the third quartile, the probability of highperformance falls within the fiducial limits".
15. Explain poor test performance or unpleasant information honestly and
meaningfully- The counsellor could say, "Your test scor^
are within the range of-successful collegiate students, but wlow average"
instead of. "Only 20% of coUegiate students have less ability than you".
16. Let the clients see their test profiles for themselves. Do not try to read them
out to the students. The counsellor could say, "Here are your test results.
You study them. I have another copy here. I shall foUow as you read",
instead of reading fiom the test proves himself.
17. Make, the client summarize what h^she has learned liom the profiles. Do
not do all the organizing for him. The counsellor could say, for example,
"How would you summarize your interests as you see them from your test
scores" instead of, "Your interests are high in this, low in this, lowest in
this", and so on.
18. Let test interpretation be the beginning of planning and not the end. The
counsellor could say, "With this test information you should now study the
occupations" instead of saying, "Well, that is what the tests show...occupation
appears to suit you."^'
NON-TEST CLIENT APPRAISAL TECHNIQUES
lit the preceding section dealing with the use of psychological tests we observed
more than once that tests are not infallible. They are not goals in themselves and
they should be used to supplement other information that is available concerning
the client
Some of the more important devices used in counselling under the non-test
category are: (1) autobiography, (2) anecdotal records, (3) rating scales, (4) diaries,
(5) case study, (6) cumulative records, and so on.
Autobiography
An autobiography is an introspective report of one's own experiences. The
psychological tests, it is often pointed out, cannot provide adequate information for
observations could be introduced artificially within the test situation. Protagonistsof autobiographies claim that they are able to overcome the above limitation of
psychological teste Md provide an authendc insight into their own personalities.
One of the other important merits of the autobiography is its vast scope
Autobiographies are generally considered to fall iiito two categories namelyunstructured and structured. Most literary autobiographies fall into the unstructur^trategoty. Behavioural scientists, sensing the usefulness of autobiography in recent
times, have devised what is known as a 'structured autobiography*. In contrast to
^'Delmont K. Bym, "The Test Interpretetion—PlaiminB Interview" UnnnWici....^prepared for use in training at the University of Michigan. ' ""Published paper


--- PAGE 165 ---
P^chologlcal Testing and Diagnosis 145
the unstructured one this is more purposeful, pointed and specific. Naturally it is
easier to analyze and study. The unstructured autobiography, as the name indicates,
could be systematic or unsystematic, it could concern only the individual's major
events in life, it could be a trenchant defense of certain acdons (for instance, Adolf
Hider's Mein Kempf), it could be in the nature of a confession (for instance.
Confessions of St Augustine, The Cortfessions of a Thug, etc.) or it could be a self-
analydcal account (Gandhi's My Experiments with Truth). The major difficulty with
unstructured autobiographies is the relative emphasis they place on different themes.
They may contain irrelevant material which may fail to provide information to
specific questions. The structured autobiographies are asked to be written along a
suggested outline consisting of topics such as (1) my family, (2) my childhood,
(3) my years before school, (4) my years in the elementary school. (5) places I have
lived, (6) trips I have taken. (7) how I spend my time every day. (8) my experiences
in the high school, (9) my teachers and my class fellows, (10) the newspapers I
read, (11) the books I like. (12) my interests, (13) my ambitions and aspirations,
and so on.
The advantage of this structured autobiography is obvious. It is designed to
provide answers to specific questions posed by the counsellor.
Autobiographies are also categorized according to the comprehensiveness or the
topicalness or limitedness of their contents (Annis, 1967). Combining the two
dimensions we could have four types of autobiographies, namely (1) structured
cmnprehensive, (2) structured topical, (3) unstructured topical and (4) unstructured
comprehensive. In interpreting autobiographies the counsellor looks for (1) the
client's 'willingness to reveal himself, (2) his self-insight and self-understanding, (3)
his ability to understand the content of the topic and (4) his ability to communicate.
There is a very important inherent weakness in this technique, namely, it is very
subjective and the real magnitude of each problem is . not known—whether the
writCT has exaggerated anything or whether he has tried to under-estimatc its
importance.
Baldwin (1942) has suggested a personal-structure analysis technique to obtain
a quantitative analysis of autobiographies. For example, he looks for the frequency
with which a particular item appears. This is indicative of its importance. The
second is contiguity of two items and their fiequency of appearance. Dollard and
Mowrer (1947) have developed a discomfort-relief coefficient to assess tension
changes applicable to autobiography. Notwithstanding the research efforts made so
far, it is safe to conclude that there is no fool-proof analysis and interpretation of
autobiographies.
The chief defects of autobiography are: (1) the difficult in determining the
consistency and authenticity of the data and (2) the lack of any criterion fcM* evaluating
the subject's internal attitudes and feelings concerning the important events in his
life.
The defects, therefore, limit the use of autobiographies in counselling practice.
Anecdotal Records
The recorded observations usually made by teachers are called anecdotal records.
This technique assists in the understanding of each student better.


--- PAGE 166 ---
146 Counsellingand Guidance
Froehlich and Hoyt (1959) define anecdotal records as follows: "An anecdotal
record consists of an objective description of pupil behaviour in a particular
environmental setting, an interpretation of the behaviour by the observer writing the
description, and a recommendation for future action based on the incident and its
interpretation".
According to Prescott (1957), the characteristics of a good anecdote are:
1. It gives the date, place, and situation in which the action occurred. This is
called the setting.
2. It describes the actions of the individual ^upil/child), the reactions of the
other people involved and the responses of the former to these reactions.
3. It quotes what is said to the individual and by the individual during the
action.
4. It states 'mood cues*—postures, gestures, voice qualities, and facial
expressions—which serve as cues to help understand how the individual
felL It does not provide interpretations of his feelings but only the cues by
which a reader may judge what they were.
5. The description is inclusive of and extensive enough to cover the episode.
The action or conversation is not left incomplete and unfinished but is
followed through to the point where an aspect of a behavioural moment in
the life of the individual is supplied.
The anecdotal record gives information about the name of the student, grade,
date, description of the setting, description of the incident and the observer's name.
On reviewing the utility and value of anecdotal records, Shertzer and Stone
(1968) indicated that a systematic programme of observation benefits administrators,
teachers, students and counsellors to (1) gain more information about an individual's
cumulative pattern of development, (2) become better observers and interpreters of
student behaviour, (3) obtain better understanding of the pupils by the administrators
and (4) help the students realize that the staff of the school is interested in them.
Such realization benefits the pupils.
lUting Scales
The rating scales are a means of quantifying observations and are easy to use.
Several observers can rate the same individual using rating scales for obtaining
more information. The pupils' characteristics, such as dependability, honesty,
cooperativeness, self-reliance, leadership and industriousness are rated by teachers,
counsellors, etc. There are four types of rating scales: numerical scales, descriptive
scales, paired comparisons and graphic rating scales. The rating scales are subject
to personal bias, halo effect, regression to central tendency ^d logical errors. Halo
effect is "The tendency to rate individuals either too high or too low on the basis
of one outstanding trait". The tendency to rate about or close to the middle position
and to avoid giving high or low rating is called regression to central tendency.
Cumulative Records
Cumulative records provide an organized, progressive record of information regarding
the student which dstinguishes him fiom all other individuals.


--- PAGE 167 ---
P^chologleal Testingand Diagnosis 147
The cumulative folder includes information, such as personal data and family
background; medical and health condition; date of school entry; school grades;
transcripts from previous schools attended; school test results; personality and
behaviour trait radngs, school activities; anecdotal records and autobiographies
written in class-room setdngs.
Three of the most common types of cumuladve records are the packet type, the
single card or folder type, and a combinadon of the above.
Mortcnsen and Schmuller (1966) state that cumulative records provide infbnnadon
concerning the following:
1. The previous (individualisdc) experiences of the pupil.
2. The group acdvides of the pupil.
3. The organization of needed curriculum or guidance experiences..
4. The evaluadon of the pupil.
5. The evaluation of different curricula.
6. The working out of district or inter-district, or state or country administrative
procedures.
7. The present experiences of the pupil.
8. The methods of carrying out research on the adequacy of results of schooling,
curricular changes, etc.
9. The personality variables of the pupil.
10. The grouping of pupils within classes for more effective use of time and
effort
11. The promoUon of students to pardcular classes and in providing placement
service.
Sensidve informaUon concerning extreme behaviour likely to be harmful if made
public, should be carefully dealt with and kept in the counsellor's conHdential file.
Specialist interpretation ftom the cumulative records helps the staff members to
Identify deviant behaviour and thereby assist the individual student
Pupil Data Questionnaires
The pupil data quesdonnaires consist of items regarding the student's home, family,
health, educational and vocational plans, out-of-school and in-school acdvities,
study habits, etc.
The pupil data quesdonnaires (1) are used to obtain comprehensive informadon
dealing with the student as he is now, employing both idiographic and normadve
data, (2) serve as a supplement to incomplete information available about students
and (3) improve the collecdon of data in an efficient manner.
SoclQmetilc Techniques
Sociometric techniques measure the inter-perscmal preferences among the members
of a group in reference to a criterion. The purpose of this technique is to measure
each individual's social worth or personal value as viewed by his peers. According
to Barclay (1966), sociometry is a method of discovering and analyzing patterns of
friendship within a group setdng.


--- PAGE 168 ---
148 hansellingand Guidance
Sociometric technique or testing falls into two categories, namely (1) the use of
choices or specific criteria to serve a particular purpose at a particular time and (2)
questionnaires or rating instruments which measure inter-personal attitudes and
feelings but not in respect to a specific criterion.
The advantage of the sociometric technique is that it provides objective
information about the functioning of individuals within their groups. When this is
viewed along with infonnation obtained by the use of other tools by the counsellor,
it gives a complete picture of the individual.
However, it should be borne in mind that sociometric tests do not give exact
answers. Their theories have not been well developed and the postulates have also
not been tested. But these limitations can also be extended to the interpretation and
application of other test results. Thus the limitations are not very specific to
sociometric tests.
Case &udy
A case study is an analysis and documentation of data collected in a case history.
It comprises the information gathered about a client, including the family history,
physical development, etc. Educational, social and vocational history is also covered
in the case study.
The case study presents a cumulative picture of the personality of an individual.
The infonnation is gathered from sources, such as cumulative records, observations,
interviews, autobiographies, self-reports, tests, teacher reactions and other school
records. The school counsellor writes the case study which provides an increased
understanding of the pupil.
While most of the guidance personnel accept the value of case studies, a few
counsellors feel that nothing new is obtained from a formal case history. It cannot
be of great assistance to the clients. The counsellors believe that any solution not
coming directly from the counsellee is valueless and, therefore, they conclude that
diagnosis based on case study is fruitless. While this is a plausible point, it cannot
be over-emphasized that a case study does help to provide and clarify the vast
amount of information needed for the understanding of a particular pattern of
behaviour of the client.
Case histories generally tend to be full of gaps and sometimes relevant information
may not be forthcoming. It is not necessary here to list the limitations and to
suggest the various safeguards that a counsellor should employ.
Case histories conventionally cover areas, such as:
1. Identifying informatioi^name, age, sex, etc.
2. Educational information—levelof education, scholastic record, subject least
liked and most liked, present educational status and future plans.
3. Personal data—general health history, family background, socio-economic
data, personal psychological relations, social psychological relations,
aspirations and the like.
4. Vocational informatioit—-jobs held, if any, choice of vocation, parental
occupation and the like.
5. Specific information indicating special problems, if any, referral agency and
the like.


--- PAGE 169 ---
P^chologlcal TestingandDiagnosis 149
In the preparation of case reports, cumulative records, if available, are of much
value. In the same way autobiographical information, if obtained, could be quite
valuable. Sometimes clients are encouraged to write projective essays on topics,
such as 'what I would like to be', 'my family' and 'my vocation'.
The case study provides an opportunity for the person to be understood and
treated as an individual. It is capable of reducing errors in diagnosis. It also helps
in the prediction of behaviour. One of the disadvantages of the case history is that
it causes delay in assistance to an individual. Another limitation is that the case
study may not be sufficient as a basis for drawing conclusions and for formulating
diagnosis for a client
It is. therefore, regarded as hazardous to place too much reliance on any single
method of client appraisal.
PSYCH0DIAGN09S
Diagnosis has always been an important and crucial step in the medical or clinical
context. In this sense it is a complex process of observation and inference involving
examining symptoms, inferring causes integrating observations and ritting them
into general categories. Diagnosis is an essential aspect of the therapeutic process.
In most medical situations diagnosis almost always precedes therapy; However, in
the psychological situation diagnosis has more than one meaning and is seldom
used as specifically as in the field of medicine. It is generally agreed that it is a
common counsellor technique involving a systematic study of the client through
appropriate means to provide a meaningful direction to the counselling relationship.
Diagnosis, in general, refers to the identification of abnormally on the basis of
the symptoms and classification of the observed characteristics of the counsellee.
According to Williamson (1950), it is a "terse summary of problems, their causes
and other significant and relevant characteristics of the client together with the
implications for potential for adjustment and mal-adjustment". In Thome's (1950)
view, "diagnosis refers to the description of the organism and his behaviour by a
variety oifmethods whose basic purpose is to discover the personality dynamics in
each individual case".
Diagnosis, according to Tyler (1953), is a means of obtaining a comprehensive
picture of the client. Patterson (1959) holds that diagnosis is understanding the
client from an external view and represents knowledge about the client rather than
knowing him. CaUis.%965) slates. "The fundamental purpose of diagnosis in
counselling is to enable the counsellor to make predictions about client behaviour
from which he in tum constructs his plans for handling the case."
Diagnosis, in a counselling situation, refers to a concise statement of the problems
of the client in his present position. It tries to identify possible causes of difficulty
in order to predict future client behaviour. Diagnosis thus, may be considered as a
hypothesis of the counsellor regarding a counsellee's present attitudes, thoughts,
etc., and possible future behaviour. Branimer and Shostrom (1968) hold that diagnosis
is a descriptive statement generally identifying the client's style of functioning. It
could be a technique to motivate desirable changes in client behaviour through a


--- PAGE 170 ---
150 CounseJllns and Guidance
description of his behavioural style. For instance, the client's understanding of
himself as a self-effacing or a self-assertive person helps motivate him to change
his behavioural style.
Shostrom (1967) holds that diagnosis provides awareness to the client which is
the first step in the actualizing process. Thus it will be seen that diagnosis is
identifying the behaviour to be modified or changed. Therefore, unless the counsellor
knows what is to be changed, he cannot possibly employ a suitable procedure to
obtain the desired results.
Rogers (19SI) is the most outspoken critic of diagnosis as a necessary step in
the counselling process. He raises the following objections concerning the
appropriateness of diagnosis: (1) It makes the counsellor responsible for improving
and understanding the client's situation and makes him Xclient) dependent on the
counsellor. (2) It makes the counsellor committed to it, even if it is found to be
unhelpful. (3) It interferes with the counselling process as such, that is, with the
release of growth forces within the client (4) Diagnosis may act as blinkers on the
counsellors. Having made the diagnosis he may rigidly stick to it by shutting his
eyes to other factors which may be of considerable importance.
Perhaps appreciating the position of Rogers, Bordin (1946) and Tyler (1963)
assign a limited role to diagnosis. Meehl (1954) and Kelly (1955) recognize the
importance of diagnostic procedures butare generally unconvinced about the validity
and dependability of diagnosis which is not strictly psychometric. Williamson (1937),
Froehlich (1956) and Hoyt (1966) hold diagnosis to be very helpful and necessary.
Psychological diagnosis generally refers to:
1. A statement of the problem or a description of the present status of the
client and probable causes of his difficulties.
2. Probable counselling techniques which would be of value.
3. Prediction of counselling outcomes.
Williamson (1939) states, "A diagnosis is,a structured summary of significant
case data." He distinguishes three distinct aspects of diagnosis: First, diagnosis of
the problem, that is, the problem of the client must be identified by the counsellor
so that he can know what has to be done about it and what approach might best
be pursued. Diagnosis thus provides orientation. It allows the counsellor to plan
doing something for the client. Second, diagnosis of the person, that is, understanding
the client through as full and as complete an appraisal of him as possible. The
counsellor should grasp the nature of the client, his needs, capacities and resources.
In this sense, diagnosis relates counsellor activities to the specific needs of the
client Bordin (1955) recognizes this step as vital to counselling. Third, diagnosis
may mean prognosis, that is, appraisal of the client's prospects of recovery. Thus
diagnosis is a complex funcdon which is often confus^ t^ause its three aspects
(problem appraisal, personal diagnosis and prognosis) are seldom distinguished
from one another.
The main purpose of diagnosis in counselling is to plan for different types
of treatments suitable for different clients. Diagnosis, in this sense, would refer
to different counsellor approaches, such as, giving information and interpreting
or helping the client's self-discovery. Weiner (1959) is also convinced of the


--- PAGE 171 ---
P^chohgtcalTestlns^dDlagnosIs 151
significance of ihe Bordin-Pepinsky diagnostic categories. The value of diagnostic
categorization is mainly for reporting or communicating. While much enthusiasm
is evident for diagnosis, it should not lead one to become blind to its shortcomings
or possible abuses. For example, a diagnostic .category such as -neurotic' is of little
help to the counsellor beyond placing the client into a stereotype category which
may not fit the client in question. Williamson's (1939) argument that diagnosis in
counselling is essentially interpreting case data is a very useful idea. According to
this view, diagnosis is a step that follows the analysis of data which forms the basis
for prognosis. Hiis view of diagnosis, often called the rationalistic view, has currency
in student personnel work and counselling. It is based on the assumption that there
is a certain lawfulness and consistency in human behaviour. This view is applicable
in educational-vocational settings. Thome (1950) takes a more clinical view of
diagnosis and asserts that an acciuate diagnosis must be made before rational
treatment can be planned and implemented. Thome's diagnostic process consists of
understanding the various levels of organization existing at a given moment
UMTTATIONS OF DIAGNOSIS
The non-directivists reject diagnosis as a legitimate counsellor activity or function.
They apprehend the dangers that are implied in the interpretative point of view of
d agnosis. It is necessary to recognize that no diagnosis can be complete, fool-proof
ai id infallible. Errors in diagnosis may arise from incompleteness or inaccuracy of
d^ta; biases and predilections of the counsellors; and &om several such acts of
cpmmission and omission. The second possible danger of rigid diagnosis is that it
could lead the counsellor to become overly preoccupied with the past history of the
client to the neglect of the present. Some counsellors hold that the diagnostic
process must be rooted in the individual's current psychological situation or milieu.
Historically diagnosis has been intimately associated with pathology. A clinician
may become preoccupied with morbidity rather than hygiology of behaviour.
There is yet another danger in leaning heavily on diagnosis. It may shift the
responsibility to the counsellor or psychotherapist who may be looked upon as an
awe-inspiring superior. This mns counter to the view that the client should take full
responsibility for his choices and actions. Rogers (1951), as we have mentioned
earlier, is extremely cridcal about the utility of diagnosis. He maintains that the
moment the counsellor attempts diagnosis he automatically takes a judgemental
atdtude. But this need not necessarily be so. While it is necessary that one should
not easily fall a victim to the temptadon of being mechanically led by diagnosis,
an effecUve counsellor would use it as a tool like any ardsan uses his tool. It is
entirely up to him as to how well or ill he uses the tool. Our examination of this
controversial quesdon of diagnosis should help us take a sciendfic aUitude. Diagnosis
is at best a kind of hypothesis and all sciendfic thinking proceeds by hypothesis
tesdng. If counselling is to be scientific it must follow the same procedure. In this
sense, diagnosis is looked upon as a guess or a provisional explanadon which could
be rejected if it cannot stand the test of fact. Thus, diagnosis would become the
scientific process of hypothesis formulation and testing and a process of


--- PAGE 172 ---
15Z Counseling and Guidance
approximation and correction. Another way of resolving the problem or the issue
could be by trying to redefine the counsellor's role as not helping in prognosis but
letting the client take specific decisions which would mean that the client should
know the direction in which he has to progress or move.
As Rogers (1951) points out, therapy is not diagnosis 'in reverse'. But it would
be theoretically impossible and undesirable hx)m the practical standpoint to do
away with diagnosis. The question is not whether or not to diagnose, but rather
wh^ the fimction of diagnosis in the helping process ought to be. The ultimate
objective of the diagnostician is very much like that of a taxonomisL The aim is
to learn as much as possible about the single individual in order to be able to
classify him in some particular group. According to Hollis (1951), there are two
aspects of diagnosis; one is our knowledge of the individual and the other is our
background knowledge about patterns of human behaviour. The underlying
assumption of diagnosis is that what we learn about one individual will shed light
on how to help another. Some case workMS feel that diagnosis is in order when it
is desirable to ascertain the presence or extent of pathology. In several counselling
situations it is helpful to Imow about other individuals particularly close to the
clients. Gombwg and Levinson (1951) speak of family diagnosis. According to
them, the nature and quality of intKaction between significant members of the
family are vital factors in the prognosis of any one of the members seeking
counselling assistance.
It is impractical, if not impossible, to do away with the need for some kind of
diagnosis in therapy. A counsellor must make decisions and plan as to how he
should proceed. In the absence of diagnosis there will be no sense of direction or
orientation. Of course, there is need to guard against committing the folly of wrong
diagnosis leading to perverted orientation. The counsellor should be alert and open
to make modifications in his diagnostic planning. The counsellor thus has to play
a delicate role of optimally balancing the Rogerian position of "withholding
judgement and attempting to stay within the client's frame of reference and trying
to understand the client diagnostically" (Brammer and Shostrom, 1968). Diagnosis
is not static. Even in medical or psychiatric situations diagnosis is often considered
as tentative. It is often subject to change depending on what new facts become
known to the therapisL In counselling situations, an undue emphasis on the diagnostic
aspects is likely to block self-expression and self-direction on the part of the client.
Pray (1947) holds that diagnosis tends to place responsibility upon the counsellor
not only for the relationship but also for the helping process. Counselling is essentially
helping the client mobilize his strengths. Diagnosis should not, therefore, by
implication, become the right to treat, correct or advise the client The counsellor
is interested in helping' the client, not in diagnosis per se. Super (1949) lists some
possible pitfalls: (1) Neglect of other possible methods of help. (2) Overemphasis
on diagnosis could result in the neglect of counselling. ^Psychodiagnosis' is also
used to mean classification, or taxonomy of. psychological problems causing
adjustmental difficulties. This process is sometimes called differential diagnosis in
which the counsellor tries to differentiate one maladjusted syndrome from another.
Several diagnostic categories are suggested by Williamson (1937), Bordin (1946),
Pepinsky (1948) and others.


--- PAGE 173 ---
P^chologlcal TesOng and Diagnosis 153
COMMON DIAGNOSHC CLASSmCATION SYSTEMS IN COUNSELLING
Williamson and Darley (1937) proposed the following diagnostic classification:
1. Personality problems—Difficulties pertaining to adjustmental problems,
family conflicts, personal problems, etc.
2. Educational problons—Such as unwise choice of courses of study, differential
scholastic achievement, inadequate general scholastic aptitude, ine^ective
study habits, reading difficulties, lack of motivation, under-achievement and
the like.
3. Vocational problems—Comprising unwise vocational choice, differences
between interests and aptitudes, etc.
4. Financial problems—^Need for self-support at school and college.
5. Health problems—^Inabili^ to go about one's routine activities owing to
problems of health.
The above classification, it is held, is simply an attempt to describe the individual
in terms of his adjustment to the several demands of his environment and focuses
on the kind of difficult encountered.
Bordin (1946) suggests an alternate classification, using five categories: no
problem, lack of information, dependence, self-conflict and choice anxie^. He
believes that this scheme is close to the basic psychological issues affecting one's
life and stresses the source of difficult. These categories are briefly explained
here.
Dependence—Conflict in this area immobilizes the client and blocks active
efforts to resolve the problem of reaching a decision. Clients in this category play
a passive role and obviously have not learnt to resolve problems on their own.
Parents at home, teachers at school, ^ends in other situations have been providing
them with ready-made solutions.
Lack of irformation—Limited or restricted range of appropriate experiences or
special opportunities to acquire necessary skills, leave the client ill equipped to
solve his problems.
5c(f-cofl/ficr—Conflicts between self-conceptions or between a self-concept and
some, other stimulus function divide the individual's judgement of a situation.
Choice anxiety—^The need to decide among alternate plans could be an upsetting
experience for the client
Lack ofassurance—^The decision is often made but the client wishes to play safe
by checking with others.
Bordin (19SS) points out that this system of categories is helpful as a general
framework for examining the problems of students but it is desirable to go into
further details to understand the client
The crucial purpose of diagnostic descriptions of behaviour is to motivate the
client to change Ids behaviour. Perls (1951) believes that the client's knowledge
of himself as a self-manipulative person helps motivate him to change his behaviour.
According to Shostrom (1967), the awareness of a system of client's manipulative
style of others helps in the actualizing process of the client.
The Missouri diagnostic classification plan is the most manageable scheme


--- PAGE 174 ---
154 CounsdIIng and Guidance
developed for research reporting purposes. In this classification a two dimensional
scheme of problem goal and cause is used. The problem goal dimension is (1)
vocational, (2) emodonal and (3) educadonal. Callis (1965) defines these three
categories as follows:
1. Vocational (VOC)—^This deals with career choice and planning, choice of
college major, and similar educadonal planning which would uldmately
implement or lead to a career plan.
2. Emotional (EM)—^This refers to personal and social adjustment problems
which have a primary affective component. Problems of adjustment to current
siuiadons involving emotions, attitudes and feelings fall into this category.
3. Educational (ED)—^Lack of effective study skills and habits, poor reading
ability or lack of information about institutional policies and regulations
come under.this category. The client is primarily concerned with adjustment
to current academic situations rather than planning for the future.
The categories in the second dimension refer to the causes of the developed
problems. The five categories of this dimension are given below:
1. Lack of information about or understanding of self {US)—^The client does
not clearly know about himself in relation to certain groups.
2. Lack ofinformation about or understanding ofthe environment {UE)—^This
refers to lack of educational and occupational information.
3. Motivational corflict within self (CS)—^There is a gap between the client's
perceived self and ideal seE
4. Cortflict with others of significance {CO)—Conflicts occur with parents,
teachers, room-mates, fiiends, etc.
5. Lack of skill (LS)—Poor reading ability, poor study skills and poor social
skills are typical.
Pepinsky's (1948) classification is a modification of Bordin's categories. He
substituted 'lack of assurance' for 'no problem'. He added another category, namely,
'lack of skill' and subdivided self-conflict into cultural, interpersonal and intra-
personal conflicts. Byrne (1958) revised the Bordin-Pepinsky categories and
suggested the following categories for further research: lack of information, lack of
insight, lack of assurance, lack of problem-solving skill, immaturity in situations
and dominance by authority, person or situation. Robinson's (1963) two dimensional
diagnostic model emphasizes the client's present and past motivation and response
patterns.
SUMMARY
Psychological tests are considered useful devices for providing objective
psychological Information about the clients. The tralt-and-factor approach attaches
much Importance to the p^chologlcal test data. However, the client-centered
approach Is very critical about the use of this data. It considers test data to be
often misleading and to block the client's Insight. Between the above two


--- PAGE 175 ---
P^chologlcal TestingandDiagnosis 155
extreme positions may be placed the attitudes of other approaches. Behavioural
approaches as well as existentialist approaches give a very limited role to the
use of tests. Test use In diagnosis has been popular with several counsellors,
while a few believe that tests are Inimical to the counselling process. Testing has
not found much favour with some counsellors. While one school believes that
testlrtg Is Inimical for the promotion of a non-threatening atmosphere of
acceptance, another school holds that the Inforrtration provided by tests Is
redundant and often Irrelevant.
The more Important non-test devices are autobiographies, anecdotal records,
rating scales, diaries, cumulative records, case studies and the like.
Non-test devices have been found to give useful information but they also
suffer from subjective errors.
In p^chodlagnosls, test and non-test data are used. The type of material to
be used depends on several factors, such as the cour)sellee*s personality, the
nature of his problem and the counsellor's orientation and predlle^ons.
Diagnosis Is a process of understanding and describing the counsellee's
problem In order that the counsellor attunes himself to the situation arid helps
the counsellee gain Insight Into himself and become capable of finding solutions
to his problems.
Different diagnostic categories are currently In use, some of which are suitable
In educational situations, while others are more appropriate to clinical situations.


--- PAGE 176 ---
8
INTRODUCnON
An interview is a face-to-iace technique of obtaining information for a variety of
purposes. It is well known as a hiring (selection) technique. It is also employed as
a technique of research (market research, consumer research, etc.). The counselling
interview differs from the above in that its goals are significantly different and
information getting is not its major interesL What is of crucial importance is that
it is therapeutic in its goal.
Every interview, whether employed for research or for counselling, must satisfy
certain basic requisites, one of which is that there should be no element of conflict
with the interviewee. The interviewer must establish rapport by securing the trust
and confidence of the interviewee. It is from this stage that the counselling interview
parts company with the other types of interviews. The counselling interview is
unique in that it is a therapeutic device along with being an information obtaining
device.
In a counselling interview, the counsellee, after having been put at ease, is
encouraged to talk freely. The counsellor assumes the attitude of an interested,
sympathetic and fnendly listener. He neither evaluates nor judges the counsellee's
statements. Thus the essential characteristic of a counselling interview consists in
its being non-judgemental and non-evaluative. The counsellor empathizes with the
counsellee's emotional needs. He makes the counsellee aware of being
unconditionally accepted. This particular aspect does not concern the other types of
interviews. The counsellor is concerned equally with what the counsellee tries to
express but fails to communicate. The counsellor is basically concemed with the
clarification, interpretation and understanding of the counsellee's feelings, ideas
and longings. In this process, there is no place for any anxiety or stress being put
on the counsellee.
Inteivlewirlng~^Its Essential Aspects
According to Garrett (1942), the interviewer should ask himself or seek answers to
the following six questions:
1. How do I view the association of ideas contained within the interview?
2. What shifts in conversation occur which might be meaningful?
3. What content and affect are present'in the client's opening and closing
statements?


--- PAGE 177 ---
Counselllnglnten/iew 157
4. What recurrent references are present?
5. Do inconsistencies and gaps occur which might be of particular significance?
6. Does a reconsideration of the session indicate an unconscious effort to
conceal or hide that which is of concern to the counsellee?^'
Association of Ideas Contained within the Interview
It is a common practice with counsellors to review the counselling session and such
a review reveals several interesting features of the counselling interview. For instance,
the interview may appear disjointed and repetitive but careful observation reveals
a pattern of consistency. The various ideas expressed by the client suggest an
underlying theme or consciousness, though superficially, for all practical purposes',
they could appear to be no more than a conglomerate of ideas got together by fiee-
association. From the apparent confusion, the counsellor can discern the conflicts
or problems or complexes that are encountered by the client. This is a very important
psychoanalytic technique of therapy. The association of iddas, therefore, may bring to
the fore the counsellee's feelings which he may not be disposed to express otherwise.
Shifts in Conversation
The counsellee may appear to be rambling in his conversation which may seem
senseless. A review of ^is could reveal significant material. What kinds of shifts
were made by the client? When did such shifts usually take place? Was the client
trying to cover up something by changing the topic or was he trying to introduce
new material to help clarify what was said earlier? Shifts also could suggest the
sensitive areas of the client's experience.
Opening and aosing Remarics
These remarits of the client may apparently mean nothing. However, the counsellor
may obtain a significant insight when reviewing these opening or closing remarks.
For instance, they may suggest reluctance on the part of the client or they may
indicate his sincerity.
Recurrent Reference
When a client refers to a particular idea or experience in the course of the counselling
interview several times, it may be of special significance.
Inconidstencles and Gaps
Some of them may appear self-contradictory but inconsistencies and gaps could
suggest resistance or traumatic experience which the client unwittingly discloses in
the conversation. During the interview the counsellor may not realize the significance
of such material.
^'Annette Garrett. Interviewing: Its Principles and Methods, New York, Family Service
Association of America, 1942.


--- PAGE 178 ---
158 Counselling and Guidance
Sfeview
In review, however, the counsellor is more likely to appreciate the concealed meaning
of the client's statements or inconsistencies or gaps in his conversation.
In verbal communication the counsellor should also notice the rapid or the
halting way in which the client speaks, the gaps in the speech and differences in
tone and voice, which could provide a wealth of information.
NON-VERBAL COMMUNICATION IN INTERVIEW
From the verbal material obtained in the interview the counsellor could gain
significant insight into problem areas or disturbances in the client. While verbal
expression is eloquent and direct, non-verbal expression could sometimes be more
revealing. There have been instances when speech has been misunderstood. And
even if speech is not misunderstood, it cannot be assumed that all feelings can be
adequately verbalized. Hence a counsellor should be watchful and alert to take note
of the non-verbal communications made by the client howsoever random and
irrelevant they may appear. Non-verbal behaviour grows out of the counselling
relationship. Understanding of non-verbal communication is basically related to
factors, such as the sensitivity, training and skill of the counsellor. Non-verbal
communication provides for an intuitive understanding of the counsellec, and its
importance, therefore, is enormous.
Non-verbal communication includes gestures like body movements, smiling,
blushing, weeping and other postural movements. Scratching the head, resting the
face on tlie hand, crossing the arms across the chest, cracking the knuckles, riddling
with the ringers, rubbing the thumb with the ringer, closing the nostrils or placing
the index finger on the nostril, biting the index finger, biting the lip, holding the
chin, playing with such things as a key chain, ring, pencil and the like'are also some
of the common devices generally employed by individuals in their non-verbal
communications. Attempts have been made to categorize body movements so that
they can be more objectively interpreted. We can wimess this objectivity to a
degree in any tradition or system of dance or pantomime where various postures
or gestures are employed to communicate certain feelings, moods and ideas. Facial
expressions are yet another source of information and understanding. It is said that
*the;face is the index of mind*.
It is naturally felt that the counsellor would profit if there was a category system
which could be employed to interpret non-verbal communication. Several attempts
have been made. For instance, Bronfenbienner and Newcomb (1948) have devised
a framework to categorize the emotional and dispositional expressions. They
identified the following five dimensions: (1) quality of motion, (2) locus of activity,
(3) direction or plane of movement, (4) front of body contour and (5) body area of
activity. Ruesch and Kees (1956) have developed a theory of non-verbal
communication. They use the term 'action language* as opposed to 'sign language*.
Ruesch (1955) has stressed the importance of non-verbal communication in
psychotherapy. Ekman (1964) believes that two Qpes of infonnation can be obtained
from non-verbal behaviour (1) specific and direct meaning and (2) infonnation


--- PAGE 179 ---
CounsellingInterview 159
about other behavioural variables. Kagan and his associates (1965) have developed
a typology of non-verbal behaviour. They obtained video-tape pictilres of their
clients and examined them closely. The non-verbal behaviour could be of three
categories: (1) the client may be fully aware of the behaviour, (2) the client may
be marginally aware and (3) the client may be entirely unaware. The behaviour
could be analyzed with respect to affect and/or content. The client's non-verbal
behaviour may also be viewed in terms of duration. It may be momentary, it may
last for a considerable time, or it may be persistent. Now in terms of the two
dimensions of awareness and duration, there can be (3 x 3) nine categories. Kagan
and his associates (1965), from the study of video-pictures of their clients, have
found gestures to be primarily concerned with emphasis. (1) The subject says
something and he gestures largely to emphasize his verbal expression. (2) Gestures
help facilitate communication. (3) Gestures may also be used to portray or
communicate a specific idea. (4) Gestures may be revealing. Usually this category
falls under the unaware dimension. These types of gestures convey to the counsellor
information which is not available to him through verbal communication. Gestures
which reveal the nature of the client usually come under the category of habitual
behaviour which the client is not aware of. But the awareness may not be the real
meaning of the gesture. For example, the client may meddle with a bunch of keys
which he (client) may be unaware of. This behaviour may often indicate existing
tension, anxiety or nervousness which the client is unconsciously expressing. (5)
The last category of non-verbal communication has also an affect content or an
emotional charge. The client may cry or weep. In this obviously the client is aware
of his own behaviour which communicates his feelings. It is an unmistakable
demonstration of feeling. Similarly, the client may also demonstrate through other
gestures a desire for counsellor approval.
The intuitive character of non-verbal communication remains an unexplored
domain. Though this area is of great importance, it has not generated sufficient
research. One of the earliest efforts were made by Maccoby and his associates
(1965) in teacher-training situations. They showed to a group of judges comprising
teachers—experienced and inexperienced—and others, films of student-teacher
interaction. When the non-verbal cues alone were considered there was no significant
improvement in jhe accuracy of judgement. Training the subjects for some time
with a few selected non-verbal cues resulted in an increase in the accuracy of
judgements.
Any reference to the study of non-verbal behavioural typology would be
incomplete if the important study of Kagan and his associates (1965), namely, the
Inter-personal Processes Recall (IPR) was not considered. They restricted their
study to gestures including arm, hand and postural movements. Obtaining a vast
repertoire of non-verbal behaviour of clients they tried to validate their typology.
The non-verbal behaviour considered was along three dimensions, namely, source,
awareness and duration of behaviour. The source was related-to the client's affective
exp^ence during the interview. Awareness concerned the counsellee's awareness
or otherwise of his acdons. Duration concerned the length of time for which a
particular behaviour persisted, the number of times the behaviour occurred, and so
on. Duration was categorized by Kagan and his associates into six categories.


--- PAGE 180 ---
160 Counselling and Guidance
namely, emphasis, facilitation, portrayal, conscious revelation, unconscious revelation
and expression of aSecL
Emphasis is usually conveyed through movements of the hands and head. The
client is usually unaware of his non-verbal expressions made for a brief duration.
Facilitation gestures are usually accompanied by verbal content and the counsellee
is marginally aware of them. Portrayal gestures are usually of longer duration and
are- made consciously. The source of the gestures for emphasis, facilitation and
portrayal are directly related to content, that is, they supplement verbal content or
communication; gestures for revelation, either conscious or unconscious, made to
express feeling, have their source in the affective domain. They indicate the feelings
of the subject whether or not he is aware of them.
COUNSUIEE—COUNSEUOR RELATIONSHIP
The success of the counselling interview largely depends on the nature of the
relationship between the counsellor and the counsellee, the latter's readiness to
communicate and his real desire to improve. The essence of the counselling interview
lies in securing aI^effective relationship which reflects permissiveness (tolerance
and indulgence), kindliness and warmth. This relationship, if established, aids in
reaching a therapeutic relationship, leading to a resolution of the counsellee's
problems so that he/she is able to bring about greater personal balance, more
frustration-tolerance, and better integration of his personality. This means the
counsellee has less anxiety, less unrealistic behaviour and can resolve a number of
his or her conflicts.
The counselling relationship differs from other kinds of relationships like those
existing between p^nts and children, between friends, between teachers and
students, and so on. ^me of the relationships may exhibit indifference and apathy.But most of the relationships above exhibit aHection and social bonds. Counselling
relationship, while being open and accepting, is essentially an objective relationship
such that "under ideal conditions the counsellorxaccepts everything the counsellee
says as an experience that can.TCCur in human beings without taking responsibility
for it or without evaluating it'^(McKinney, 1958).The crux of the problem lies in establishing an effective counselling relationship.
Counsellors as individuals bring into the situation their own needs, values, anxieties
and conflicts. Some of them have other roles to play such as those of a teacher,
parent, or supervisor outside the counselling situation. Naturally, they will introject
the attitudes of the concerned roles. They may interpret counsellee symptoms as
impulsive, obstinate and irralional.^ey may have rigid expectations concerninghow people should conduct themrelves and these could come in the way of
establishing a good relationship which is characterized as an unconditional
acceptance Individuals as teachers and supervisors accept or praise pupils or others
so long as they conform to/the norms expected of them. Such acceptance is called
conditional acceptance. This is not expected of a counsellor in a counselling situation.
What is expected of him is his unconditional acceptance of the client, that is, the
counsellor does not prescribe or demand compliance to his expectations. For example.


--- PAGE 181 ---
Counselling Interview 161
the parent accepts his child and showers concern and affection, notwithstanding the
fact that the child has committed an error or misbehaved. For the parent, he/she is
his/her child, and this relationship does not end because of the misdeeds or mistakes
committed by the child. The parent's affection is uncondidonal. This does not
preclude the fact that a parent may experience unhappiness and misery owing to
his/her child's behavioui^
INTERVIEWING TECHN1Q.IIES IN COUNSELLING
Coimselling techniques concern the specific procedures and skills employed by the
counsellor in securing his counselling goals or objectives. There could be variations
in the techniques employed by diHerent counsellors, which could be either owing
to subjective factors, such as responsibility, leading and planning statements of the
counsellor or to the specific nature of the counsellee's problem, or to both. However,
there is always a danger of becoming too technique-conscious in one's approach.
This kind of rigid technique-oriented approach sometimes makes the counsellor's
position look ridiculous in his blind adherence to thumb-rules or fixed formulae.
Similar techniques cannot be applied to all clients. There is a subjective element
involved in the choice of a specific technique by the counsellor. Usually counsellors
develop varying styles based on their appreciation of the counsellee's needs. The
different techniques, at any time, are in the constant process of empirical validation.
We will discuss some of the well known techniques which have been experimentally
validated.
The foremost issue concerns the basic nature of the approach, namely, the client-
centered approach or the non-directive approach, the directive approach, the
authoritarian approach and the eclectic approach. The nature of direction in a specific
approach is concerned with the amount of lead taken by the counsellor, the
involvement of the client and other such basic matteis. For instance, the authoritarian
approach assumes that the client is ignorant and helpless in the matter confronting
him as it is determined by uncoiiscious forces and that it is for the counsellor to
take the responsibility of helping to solve the client's problem. The'non-directive
approach, on the other hand, assumes a more or less diametrically opposite position.
It holds that the counsellor is igntiiant about the counsellee's personality and
therefore, does not know anything about the client's problem. It is for the client,
therefore, to solve or resolve his problems by his active participation. The counsellor
helps the client by providing a conducive atmosphere exuding warmth and
friendliness devoid of tension and stress. The directive approach assumes that
individuals have different degrees of knowledge about themselves as well as their
environment. They fail to solve their problems or make necessary choices leading
to the resolution of their problems as a result of lack of sufficient information or
ignorance about certain critical issues. The counsellor, therefore, has to give, objective
and dependable information to the client regarding his assets and liabilities as well
as information about the situation in all its aspects. The eclectic approach would not
like to identify itself with any particular theoretical point of view. The eclectic
counsellor believes that he should have freedom to choose the approach that suits


--- PAGE 182 ---
162 ComseJIIns and Guidance
his client. Thus, the importance the different approaches assume depends on the
manner in which a counsellor has to deal with his client.
While it could be said that a technique without a proper theory and philosophy
would be blind, we could with equal force and conviction say that mere theory and
philosophy without application would be sterile; therefore, we cannot divorce a
technique from its thwretical moorings. Counselling techniques may be seen as the
individual innovations of the counsellors to suit each counselling situation. Some
of the innovations have stood the test of time and have come to be accepted as
dependable techniques.
Speaking of techniques, we could identify the individual character of each of
them from the time the counsellee makes his first contact. This is a crucial stage
and the importance of the 'opening technique' cannot be overemphasized. How
does the counsellor make his first move? In other words, how does he establish a
feeling of trust? There could be different techniques of securing the trust of the
client but it would be fruitless to try to explain or describe them as they grow out
of the counsellor's experiences and become important skills. For example, some
counsellors go out to receive their clients when they arrive. Others warmly greet
them and yet others just smile at them. All the three approaches may be good and
successful in securing rapport and a feeling of trust. Some clients may react warmly
to the counsellor's reception, others may not be very much concerned with iL The
next question is that of breaking the ice. What kind of topics should be talked
about? Would it be belter to plunge into the counselling session straightaway or
would it help to have a brief conversation on non-affective items such that the.
chent feels comfortable and gets a sort of breathing time to put himself at ease?
STRUCTURING THE COUNSELIING RELATIONSHIP
The counsellee arrives with several feelings, attiuides and expectations. He is often
nervous and wonders what is going to happen. It is essential that the counsellorin es It clear to the counsellee regarding what may take place in the counselling
situauon. This is called 'structuring'. Much has been written about this. Sometimes
counsellors are ^d to use an unstructured situation. But the problem is quite^klish or sensitive in that there can be nothing like an unstrucuired relationship.
minimal structuring as contrasted with structuring the situation.What do we mean by structuring? For most counsellors, structuring concerns the
nature of the counselling relationship and indicates the limits, roles, goals and the
e. In short, structuring concerns the practical mechanics of the counselling
relationship. It dispels many initial misconceptions about counselling. This kind ofinitial uriderstanding, accor^ng to some counsellors, could be of great value to the
chents. It is good if the client has some understanding and grasp of the matter.
What does he expect from the counselling relationship? What would be his
responsibilities and commitments? What is the amount of time that would be available
to him? What fees, if any, does he have to pay? and the like. When a client does
not know anything about such matters, he is obviously going to feel uncomfortable
and anxious.


--- PAGE 183 ---
Counselllnglntervlew 163
Structuring has other important goals. Most clients have faulty notions about
counselling. Some clients ask the counsellor to psychoanalyse them. Others may
want the counsellor to give a few tests and interpret the results. While the counsellor
may do what the clients expect him to do, if found necessary, it does not mean that
the counsellor will always have to do what the client asks for. Thus structuring the
interview dispels some of the misconceptions. It also provides the counsellee with
the necessary orientation to the counselling situation. Usually in referral cases
clients tend to become truculent or assume a tacitiuo attitude because they labour
under a misconception that the counsellor is part of the establishment and that the
counsellor is only an agency to justify the action of the management. This is
frequently the situation with clients referred to by industrial managements or by
school or college authorities. Structuring helps to reduce anxiety in the clients.
There is yet another category of clients who are convinced about the wastefulness
of this process and believe that it is not going to be of much consequence to them.
Such clients tend to respond at the superficial level and may not actively participate
in the counselling relationship. Structuring in this situation may help save much of
the time of the counsellor as well as that of the client.
Most importantly, structuring thus helps' clients obtain a certain amount of
orientation to the counselling situation.
DEGREE OF LEAD
The second technique or style of functioning concerns the degree of lead to be
taken by the counsellor. Since a lot of material is written on this issue, we shall
attempt to give a very brief description of the different leads. Robinson (1950) has
used the term 'lead' to connote, "a team like working together in which the
counsellor's remarks seem to the client to state the next point he is ready to accept".
Lead refers to the kind of communication, verbal or otherwise, made by the counsellor
which helps, invites, directs or prods the client towards making a response. For
example, the counsellor may use silence as a lead. The counsellor's role in this
context would be one of receiving. The counsellor may merely restate what the
client has said. In this the counsellor's role is one of acceptance. The counsellor
may employ another lead—the reflection of feelings. He may say, "you feel like...."
Here the counsellor's role is one of making the counsellee understand. The counsellor
may explore. This is suggested by "yes, go on" or "tell me more about it", etc. The
counsellor's role here is one of searching. Counsellors, therefore, employ different
leads and play different roles designed to elicit feeling or facilitate understanding
or action. In the latter two contexts, namely, understanding and action, the counsellor
may summarize the client's expressions, attempt a tentative analysis and interpret
the client's expressions and feelings. He may resort to direct questioning to investigate
a wider area or delve into the client's feelings. Usually the counsellor provides
reassurance, support and encouragement to help build the confidence of the client.
To ensiue action the counsellor may, in addition to assurance, employ techniques
such as suggestion, persuasion, urging and even cajoling. What kind of technique
the counsellor should use, and with what type of client, cannot be explained as a
matter of formulae or thumb rules. Much depends on the counsellor's intuitive


--- PAGE 184 ---
164 Counsellingand Guidance
judgement boni out of his experience and the situation on hand. In some speciflc
situations, the counsellor may give advice in addition to information to facilitate
acceptance. This should not, however, be mistaken for the type or kind of advice
given by parents., teachers, friends, neighbours and well-wishers. In essence, the
advice given by a counsellor on closer examination would be found to be no advice
at all. Usually, it takes (he form of the question, "What do you think you would
do?" as an answer to the client's question, "What do you think I should do?"
SILENCE
Silence perhaps is the most difficult technique to master for most counsellors who
are teachers. More often than not, they are prone to think client-silence as
synonymous with counsellor failure. Naturally they feel embanassed and get annoyed
with the situation. However, silence is a time honoured technique employed by
pastoral (clergy) counsellors. There are certain qualitative differences in this mode
of response. For instance, there could be a pause in the conversation. This pause
could extend into an uncomfortable silence. The counsellor may view this as a
refusal on the part of the client to communicate.
As has been mentioned, the counsellor may also employ silence as a technique.
He may use it deliberately for organizational purposes or to terminate the counselling
session.
relationship techniques
The goal of the counsellor is to bring about the desirable change in the client's
behaviour. The behaviour exhibited by the client as a result of counselling is the
proof of his acceptance and action as influenced by the techniques designed by the
counsellor.
Rogers (1942) stresses the importance of relationship techniques, the first among
which is the reflection of feeling. The client usually talks about his feelings in an
unconcerned way as if his feelings are something apart from himself. This method
serves as a defense mechanism. The counsellor, by trying to make the client reflect
on his own feelings, directs the attention of the client to himself. He makes the
client see that the feelings are part of the subjective self, and when once understood
and appreciated, they cease to be bothersome. But this is very difficult to accomplish.
It is not only intangible but also very subtle. The counsellor, according to Rogers
(1951), attempts to mirror the client's attitudes and feelings for his improved self-
understanding. The word 'mirror' is very important in this context. Notwithstanding
the fact that several mirrors distent, sometimes grotesquely, the counsellor is supposed
to be like a neutral surface reflecting the client's feelings back to him such that he
is able to gain a better understanding of himself. There is a real danger of
misunderstanding this issue. When we say understanding feelings, usually it is
understood as intellectuailizing feelings, 'or in other words, the deaffecting of
affections. By reflection of feeling and self-understanding is meant a better
appreciation, identification and expression of feeling and not the negation of it The


--- PAGE 185 ---
Counselling Interview 165
expression of feelings is actually encouraged by the reflection technique. As feelings
are the source of most problems, clients have a marked tendency to disown and
distrust their own feelings. The technique of reflecting feelings is aimed at reversing
this process. The client is assisted to trust his feelings and thereby derive his
strength, not by denying.a part of himself, but by mastering himself.
The second relationship between the counsellor and the client is the conveying
of experience through both verbal and non-verbal means. Clients' verbal or non
verbal behaviour conveys feelings. The counsellor, on his part, may also communicate
by reflecting his experience, employing the same means. There could be concordance
or harmony between what is said verbally and what is communicated non-verbally.
Often what is said verbally may not be reflected in the non-verbal gestures. This
common experience with human beings has often led to the peiplexing picture of
discordant reflections of experience. What is said verbally may not be really
communicated through the non-verbal channels of communication of gestures, tone,
voice, posture and the like. It, therefore, becomes necessary for the counsellor to
acquire the skills and perfect them such that he is sensitive to the non-veibal
communication employed by the client to reflect experience.
SHARING OF EXPERENCE
The relationship between the counsellor ^d the client is cential to the therapeutic
process. This relationship may be conceived ^ a continuum with personal
responsiveness and reflection of feeling at one end and sharing of experience at the
other end. At a somewhat central position lies reflection of experience. Sharing of
experience consists in expressing his own feelings, ideas and experiences by the
counsellor with a view to helping the client experience his own feelings in a more
expressive fashion. Sharing of experience corresponds to modelling in the behaviour
therapy. In this the counsellor, by expressing his feelings, lets the client emulate
him. Thus sharing of experience involves the counsellor's willingness to share with
the client his own personal feelings. Reflection of feeling, reflection of experience
and sharing of experience together contribute to the actualization therapy and are
very much identified with the Rogerian therapy. Reflection of feeling involves the
identification of the feelings expressed by clients: It is very often difficult to identify
the feelings expressed by clients. Reid and Snyder (1947) have found appreciable
variation among counsellors in their identification of clients' feelings. Feelings fall
under three broad categories, namely, positive, ambivalent and negative. Positive
feelings are ego-constructive and help in the process of self-actualization. Negative
feelings, in contrast, are ego-destructive. Ambivalent feelings usually are conflicting
feelings expressed at the same time towards the same subject. They correspond to
the love-hate relationship. Ambivalent feelings are of particular importance from
the point of view of counselling because they help the counsellor identify the
apparent contradicdons and reflect them to the client. Ambivalent feelings could
b^ome a source of great inter-personal tension. One of the goals of counselling is
to make the client realize the apparent contradictions in his feelings.
Reflecdon of feeling, reflecdon of experience and sharing of experience have


--- PAGE 186 ---
166 Counsellingand Guidance
been described above as significant devices in counselling. However, reflection of
feelings or sharing of experience are perhaps the toughest and most challenging of
the counsellor skills. Some of the difliculdes of reflecting are explained below.
Stereotype
This is a ^pe of mannoism that individuals employ and a counsellor could innocently
acquire a mannerism of his own in using the same phrase, such as "you feel" or
"I see". These kinds of stereotyped expressions may not help to arouse the feelings
of the clients. They may, on the contrary, make the client more rigid.
Timing
Timing has a unique place in the order of things. When something is done at the
appropriate time it yields optimal results. However, it is not always easy to judge
the proper timing. In counselling this is of paramount importance. When the
counsellor should or should not act, that is, when a certaia action is appropriate or
not, is of great importance in determining the course and success of the counselling
process.
Selection of Feelings
The client may express several feelings of varying importance. The counsellor
exercises his subjective judgement in choosing to reflect one feeling rather than
another. In this way, the counsellor actually is directing the client along certain
channels which he deems iinportant. In this sense the non-directive approach, on
closer examination, is achially a directive approach. Often this subtle but important
point is missed and the Rogerian approach is emphatically declared as a non-
tiirective approach par excellence. •
Content
The material expressed by the client could be of different degrees of significance
from the point of view of the counsellor. A wrong approach would be to reflect
content, that is, to repeat the words or the substance of what the client has expressed.
The counsellor blindly or mechanically states what has been said by the client
Reflecting content is of little value in counselling. Often it may be detrimental to
the counselling process. The counsellor should primarily be concerned with feeling
but not with content. If the counsellor were to be so concerned, he would be
missing the essence of the communication.
Depth
This connotes the obvious experience of our day-to-day life. We experience some
feelings deeply while many feelings may be experienced superficially. In other
words', some of our feelings could be shallow and others deep. A counsellor could
by attending to the shallow feelings, be wasting his time and energy. At the same
time it cannot be gainsaid that the counsellor should not reflect too deeply. Either
extreme may prove counter-productive.


--- PAGE 187 ---
Counselllnslntervlew 167
Meaning
Perhaps this is one of the common ways of secondary elaboration indulged in by
all of us frequently. When something is said we either read too much meaning into
it or do the reverse. This is the common concern of all our communication techniques.
For example, if someone says that he saw a tiger, the listener may report that the
speaker smd that he saw a big tiger. Much of this addition or omission is unintentional
and may also be quite harmless. But there are occasions when a slight addition or
omission could change the whole complexion of a communication. A counsellor
should guard against committing this common error. A counsellor is not supposed
to add or detract any meaning, however trivial, in any circumstance.
language
The importance of language is easily appreciated. It is through language that the
nuances of feelings are expressed. A counsellor is expected to be careful in the
choice of his words. He cannot afford to be careless with the most important tool
of communication, namely, language. In the same way. he is expected to follow the
client's language as carefully as possible.
Thinking
The reflection of feeling or experience could vary in timing. The counsellor may
employ Immediate reflection or may use the technique of summary reflection. The
difference is that in immediate reflection the counsellor deals with one feeling at
a time. It also means that he idendfies the feeling as it is expressed and immediately
reflects it, in which process he may interrupt the client's flow of expression. In
summary reflecdon the counsellor may reflect a number of feelings at one time and
he may not interrupt the client until he finds a logical or appropriate pause. But he
may miss out a few feelings in the process owing to memory lapses. The last kind
of reflection is called terminal reflection and it comprises a summarizing process
usually conducted at the time of the termination of the counselling relationship.
The foregoing account will have indicated the importance of reflection as a
counselling technique. However, nothing has been said regarding the effectiveness
or the conditions which affect the effectiveness of reflection. First of all, it needs
to be understood that reflection helps the individual (client) to feel understood.
People often experience this feeling of being misunderstood and yearn for proper
understanding. Through reflection, the feeling of being misunderstood is dispelled.
The effectiveness of reflection consists in not being misunderstood. Reflection
helps to break the neurotic cycle which is commonly experienced by clients. This
is expressed in statements, such as "he will not understand me and, therefore, there
is no purpose in trying to understand him". This vicious cycle of reasoning is
broken by the reflection technique. It was explained that the reflection of feeling
helps in self-understanding. The effectiveness of reflection consists in helping the
client understand that feelings determine his behaviour. Reflection, therefore, has
a clarifying or simplifying function. It helps the client to evaluate his feelings when
once he is able to appreciate their significance in contributing to self-understanding.
This logically leads to the power of choice that reflection gives the client. Reflection


--- PAGE 188 ---
168 Coun$eIHngandCuldence
on several of his feelings will help him in knowing the significance of each one of
them. Thus the client is able to choose what would best serve his purpose. Finally,
reflection helps clarify a client's motives. Often clients are tempted to say, "I feel"
or "I feel like". Seldom does he say, "I feel like this because". This power of
reasoning leads to the core (underlying) motive or experience.
Acceptance
I  The second relationship technique is acceptance. Rogers (1951) places great
importance on the unconditional acceptance of the client by the counsellor. The
other approaches of counselling have not made this one of the basic issues.
Acceptance is based on the belief that the client has dignity and worth. It is also
based on such important assumptions as the right to make decisions and to be
responsible for one's own actions and hence for one's life.
Acceptance provides the necessary psychological climate for the counselling
interview. It helps the clients get involved in the counselling process and thus
minimizes the possibility of the adoption of defensive attitudes through
rationalizations, denials, explanations, etc.
Acceptance implies neither approval nor a patronizing attitude. The client should
not be under the misconception that his expressions will be approved or disapproved
by the counsellor dependLig on whether he is accepted or not. Again, acceptance
is not a neutral attitude. It is positive in its response. Acceptance is not to sympathize
with the client or tolerate him. The counsellor has to communicate to the client the
sense or feeling of acceptance, such that he experiences the warmth and friendliness
of the situation. Brammer and Shostrom (1968) state that there are three major
observable elements through which acceptance can be expressed by the counsellor:
(1) facial expression conveying the genuine interest of the counsellor, (2) tone of
voice and its inflections, and (3) distance and posture of the counsellor. Actions,
such as yawning, fiequent movement of the hands and legs, changes in the posture
and other similar cues have negative significance and communicate lack of
acceptance.
Special Relationship Problems
While the counsellor may use and apply his chosen technique with all the wisdom
and skill at his command, it is often found that certain psychological phenomena
aid or limit his efforts. More often than not, counsellors are baffled when they
encounter such situations which usually hinder the process of counselling. The
phenomena, namely, transference, counter-transference and resistance have been
as special relationship problems. The phenomena have been recognized
to be of central importance in the psycho-analytic technique. It is recognized that
counselling cannot ignore the special relationship problems and they are considered
to be as valid to counselling as they are to psychoanalysis.In psychoanalytical thinking, transference is a process by which the client's
attimdes, formerly expre^ed towards one person (usually the parent of the oppositesex), SK transferred or prejected to the counsellor/ Transference, for the existential
thCTapists, does not meaii the same as it does for a psychoanalyst. The existentialist


--- PAGE 189 ---
Counselllnglntervfew 169
does not believe that transference implies the transfer of a client's feelings for his
family members to the therapist. The neurotic is one who has not grown beyond
the restricted forms of experience characteristic of a child in most affective areas
of development. Hence, in later years he perceives others or tlie therapist in the
same manner as he perceived his father or mother as a child. The problem of
transference for the neurotic client is primarily one of relationship to events in the
present and his perception of the present situation in terms of his past experience.
Transference
Transference could be positive or negative in nature. Positive transference involves
the expression of feelings of affection or dependency, and negative tipisference the
expression of feelings of hostility and aggression towards the counsellor. A counsellee
may react to the counsellor as he would react to his parent Sometimes the affective
reaction could be a negative one in which the counsellee may feel (erroneously of
course) that the counsellor has contempt or anger for him. The counsellee sometimes
shows positive affective reactions, such as adoration, and the counsellee is often
unconscious of his reactions towards the counsellor.
Wood (1951), discussing transference in client-centered therapy and
psychoanalysis, gives the following illustration: During the second interview his
client observed "...it seemed to me that as we were talking along, that you, not only
as a counsellor but you as an individual were getting sort of excited about this thing
too, just as I was. And that, well, at times, you were no longer a counsellor to me,
but you were just another person that I was talking over this problem with". During
the fourth interview the client observed, "as a matter of fact, a peculiar thing, I hate
to admit it (laughs) is that, except in the last two interviews, I don't believe I've
been much concerned with your reflections. You probably realize I have been
moving pretty fast and somewhat running up middle of your spine at times without,
uh, knowing it, desiring to go ahead. A sort'of manic euphoria (laughs). But I guess
I have done enough to you today".
In therapeutic use, the counsellor does not view transference as a problem, but
as a situation in which the client gives the therapist valuable information on how
he perceives his world. Thus, the transference relationship is a rich source of inter
personal data. Rogers (1942) believes that the feelings of transference develop
when the client perceives that the 'other' person (counsellor) understands him
better than he understands himself. Initially, that is, before transference there is no
relationship between the client and the counsellor which involves transference.
After the initial contact and development of relationship which widens eventually
to provide a situation for the appearance of transference, the client's identification
with the counsellor becomes stronger, leading to transference. When transference
is resolved the client withdraws his projections, culminating the therapy.
Therapeutic Functions of Transference
Strong transferences towards the counsellor are often complicated. But transference
of a less intense nature serves to build the relationship by allowing the clieril to
express distorted feelings without the usual counter-defensive reqx}nses. Transference


--- PAGE 190 ---
t70 Counselllngand Cutdancs
promotes the client's confidence in the counsellor through his handling of the
transference feelings. Such feelings help to amplify the client's emotional
involvement with the problem and enable him to continue the counselling
relationship. Transference further helps the client become aware of the origin of his
feelings in his present life situation through interpretation. The transfened feelings
along with maladaptive behaviour tend to disappear when insight is gained and
more satisfying and mature relationships with people are established. The counsellor
should not fit himself into the client's projections so as to satisfy the client's
neurotic needs. If the counsellor does this, there is a possibility that the projections
will be perpetuated by being reinforced.
How does the counsellor work with the transference relationship? The primary
technique for resolving the transference feeling is by simple acceptance. This will
enable the client to live or act out his feelings. 'The client recognizes that the
transference feelings belong to himself and not to the counsellor. More frequently
the counsellor can ask clarifying questions concerning what the client manifests in
the form of anxiety. "You seem to be unloading on me today. Why do you suppose
this is happening?" This statement explores the client attitudes first and gives him
an opportunity to interpret his own feelings. The counsellor reflects the transference
feeling and by this process the client gains more insight into his feelings. The
counseUor may interpret the transference feeling directly. The object of this is to
clarify the relationship between the client's earlier inter-personal relationships and
his present behaviour. The counsellor may just focus on the client's present behaviour
rather than question its origin. The principle involved is that all feelings need not
automatically be construed as transferred from the past. Some feelings may be the
Insult of gentune interaction between the therapist and client
Couiiter<transference
Counter-transference is the projection of the counsellor's feelings towards the client.
In this the counsellor is reacting in a similar fashion as the client transferring his
feelings. Counter-transference, therefore, refers to the emotional reactions and
projections of the counsellor to the client. This could be a serious handicap to the
client's transference in the counselling process. The counsellee by his behaviour
may remind the counsellor of some past experience and he (counsellor) may react
to the counsellee affectively which may be either positive or negative. The counsellor
may view the counsellee as an impulsive, head-strong and selfish individual. This
is an instance of counter-transference. Compulsive advice-giving is a surreptitious
and subtle form of counter-transference. Counsellors tend to easily take an "if I
were you" approach even in the counselling relationships. A common counter-
Iransference fteling is the idea that the counsellee must somehow like the counsellor
and be pleased with him.
What are the sources of counter-transference?
1. The counsellor's-uiuesolved personal problems may be one source and they
indicate the need for counselling the counsellor.
2. Situational pressures coinciding with the counsellor's problems may aggravate
his latent feelings.


--- PAGE 191 ---
CounsellingInterview 171
3. Counter-transference may emanate while the client is communicating his
feelings to thg counsellor.
If the counsellor tends to be overly sympathetic it could be because of the underlying
need for sympathy and attention on his part. The counsellor's value-structure could
be a veritable source of counter-transference. The very nature of the counselling
relationship puts the counsellor in a position to influence the clienL This happens
notwithstanding the counsellor's objective, non-judgemental and permissive
(indulgent) attitude. It is often difficult for the counsellor to avoid conveying the
feeling that he regards emotional maturity, for example, as an important goal of
counselling. Usually the counsellor conveys his values to the client. Professionally
speaking, there is no question of conveying personal values in the counselling
process, even if they are to facilitate counselling.
Resolving Counter'^ansference Feelings
After an awareness of the feelings of counter-transference the first step consists of
the counsellor asking himself, "Why is it so?" The counsellor must accept the fact
that he has varied feelings about the client and that he will change somewhat by
the counselling experience. The counsellor must be aware that his anxieties could
arise from insecurity in the counselling role.
Every counsellor who feels uneasy about his responses to a client should admit
the possibility that his comments are a form of his own projections. All that may
be necessary is to admit this possibility fiankly and attempt to change. Though
there is no objective evidence to indicate that it is useful to discuss counter-
transference feelings with the client it is found to be a mild, reassuring and
interpretative reference, helpful in allaying anxiety. The counsellor can use his own
awareness of himself as reflected through the therapeutic process to enhance his
own growth and resolve his difficulties. Counter-transference can sometimes be
handled easily by asking the client to discuss the problems in ^up therapy situations.
Resistance
The term 'resistance* was used by Freud (1903) to indicate the unconscious
opposition in bringing material fiom the domain of the id into the ego. Resistance
is explained as one of the protective functions of the ego. According to Bordin
(1968), "Resistance is the reflection of the patient's inability to deal directly,
realistically and constructively with his impulses as they appear during the process
of therapy."
In the counselling situation one of the principal realities of building and
maintaining effective counselling relationship must concern itself with the
phenomenon of resistance. Resistance could be understood as a special defensive
form of transference. It could be a product of the outer defence system protecting
the client from situational threats or of the inner defense system guarding the client
from his unconscious impulses. The existentialists view resistance as a tendency of
the client to renounce his unique and original potentiality which is inalienable.
According to existentialists, resistance is exhibited as social conformity. May, Angel
and Ellenberger (1958) explain that "Social Conformity is a general form of resistance


--- PAGE 192 ---
172 Counselllngand Guidance
to life",...■and even the patient's acceptance of the doctrines and interpretations of
the therapist may itself be an expression of resistance". The client often appears not
to make any effort to overcome his difficulty. On university campuses we come
across several students who represent Q^ical instances of resistance. Usually a
student may meet the counsellor and speak beseechingly about his situation and the
importance of the need for help from the counsellor. More often than not, the
student does not keep the appointment if made, and may not turn up on lime even
if he were to keep the appointment. Resistance, like transference, is explained to
have different implications for psychothraapy and counselling. From the point of
view of counselling, resistance can be understood as something which opposes
progress in problem solving. Therefore, the counsellor is very much concerned with
the need to reduce resistance as far as possible. Resistance exists in varying degrees
in all counselling interviews and may vary from a rejection of counselling or overt
antagonism on the one hand, to subtle forms, such as hesitation, inattention and the
like on the other. During the counselling session, the counsellee just sits rigidly and
does not make any effort to present his problem. If persuaded patiently, he may
come out with a statement which usually runs somewhat like this, "I just don't
know what to talk about. I never expected to do the talking". If asked to try to face
his problem and speak freely about it, he becomes uneasy and tries to be evasive,
making some general statements like, "Everybody wants to score well and succeed,
I want to succeed too". He never comes to grips with his real problem and there
is a lot of evasion concerning it At the end of the session he may just leave the
counsellor wondering whether he will return. A simple example of resistance is
embarrassment which is the tendency to make contact and retreat at the same time.
Blocking is another example of resistance. Although resistance is present in all
interviews to some degree the client is seldom aware of it Since resistance is
largely an unconscious phenomenon it is manifested as an ambivalent attitude
towards counselling.
Source of Resistance
When the client perceives the counsellor or the situation or the specific topic as
threatening, resistance is exhibited. It could be either internal or external in origin.
Iiitemal resistance is the inclination of anxious clients to withdraw from usually
distasteful attempts to seek and to modify paoems of behaviour or personality
structure. It, therefore, represents a fear of growing or of not wishing to be self-
supportive. The common forms of pretwice are also instances of internal resistance.
For example, a student's poor performance is explained as being due to some
outside fector, such as tough question papers or strict evaluation. Another example
of resistance is reification or conversion anxiety which is the client's fear of
expressing his feelings in words. E^^ples of such resistance are unwillingness to
express anxieties about contacting diseases of death, etc. External resistance usually
grows out of poor techniques of coping on the part of the client An illustration of
external resistance could be one in which the counsellor suggests methods of
improving social skills. The client may become anxious and fail to employ them
as he may have anxiety about other external factors interfering with the application
of the new social skills. Resistance may also result from lack of readiness on the


--- PAGE 193 ---
Counselllnglntervfew 173
part of the client A client may not realize his responsibilities in the counselling,
situation and may resent spending time with the counsellor expressing or
communicating his ideas. The counselling relationship is often viewed as a
paradoxical situation by the client. The 'accepting' atmosphere encourages the free
expression of feelings and yet the client is not ready to express or to accept his own
feelings. This relationship may force a premature examination of the client's feelings,
leading to considerable resistance. There are also mixed sources of resistance which
may imply internal resistance, in addition to external resistance. Knowing the sources
of resistance would be of considerable value to the counsellor in understanding the
real nature of the problem he has to deal with.
Functions of Resistance
Resistance, we have explained, has a defensive function for the client Apart firom
this it also has value for the counsellor. It gives an indication of the progress of the
counselling interview and may serve as a basis for the diagnosis as well as the
prognosis of the case on hand. Resistance provides a glimpse into the client's
defensive structiue and could inform the counsellor when he is heading on taboo
territory. Resistance, if known to the counsellor, offers valuable interpretative
information. From the point of view of the client, resistance acts as a protective
mechanism to keep acute anxiety under control. Resistance may manifest itself in
a number of ways which are usually negative. The most significant manifestation
of resistance is silence or refusal to speak or communicate. Resistance may take
other forms as well, like refusing to get emotionally involved, not being cooperative,
maintaining a persistent aloof attitude, etc. Bugental (1952) postulates five levels
of resistance varying from lagging, through inertia, tentative resistance, true
resistance, to rejection. At the lagging level the client is found to transfer
responsibility to the counsellor. The response pauem is one of distractions and
slowness in responding. The inertia level exhibits a strong sense of disinterest
demonstrated by such behavioural signs as monosyllabic answers, disregard of
counsellor leads and the like. Tentative resistance is indicated by behaviour, such
as argumentation, exhibition of physical tension, expression of hostility in an inhibited
form and the like. True resistance is exhibited by withdrawn behaviour or by
making vague or diffused answers to counsellor questions. Rejection is the extreme
form of resistance which is exhibited by refusal to communicate sufficiently in
spite of persistent and persuasive attempts on the part of the counsellor.
Thus resistance is a special relationship problem between the counsellor and the
client. Methods of handling such situations have to be explored.
Nfr-. Gupta was admitted as an in-patient for a variety of symptoms. He had
stiffness in his legs and back and was suffering considerably. Physical examination
revealed nothing positive. No organic basis for his symptoms could be identified.
He did not Improve even after a week in the hospital after which rime he left. He
was referred to the counsellor who found him extremely restive and irritable. He
was even hostile. But patient handling of Gupta revealed that he was unwiUing to
see the counsellor. The counsellor remarked, "I understand you don't want to see
me. You think that you feel worse after a meeting with me. If you talk out yourdifficulties perhaps it will be of help. Nothing is lost, you know, if you spend some


--- PAGE 194 ---
Counselllngand Guidance
time with me airing your difTicullies and letting off steam." Gupta was reluctant buton persuasion promised to see the counsellor. In the course of the next two months.Gupta met the counsellor more than half a dozen times. He still held that he wasill but agreed that he felt better. This is a case of resistance. In most neurotic cases,
the symptoms serve a protective purpose. The person clings to the symptoms toescape feelings of disgrace, failure or inadequacy. Guilt-feelings, fears, distor^ideas, and the like are apparently abhorred by the counsellee but he resists givingthem'up. A reduction in client resistance, therefore, is the essential first step Wcounselling.
Resistance may take an inexhaustive variety of forms. Sometimes the counseliu®
expresses resistance verbally by saying that there is nothing wrong with him. There
is, therefore, no need to see the counsellor and talk with him. "I have no r^
problems and I don't know what to talk about." This is an instance of initial
resistance. After the effective relationship with the counsellor is established,
resistance is overcome and the counsellee may find that it has been a worthwhile
experience going through the counselling process.
The client makes an appointment with the counsellor and seeks help in resolving
a personal problem. He arrives at the counselling centre at the appointed time. The
counsellor receives him warmly and makes an appreciative comment regarding the
counsellee. The counsellee smiles and then blushes and after a brief silence begin®
pouring out his problems. The counsellor listens uninterruptedly and makes an
occasional monosyllablic remaric and conveys through it his empathic feeling. The
counsellee verbalizes his feelings for 20 minutes and stops. The counsellor says,
understand you. You have my sympathies. I wish I could do something for you.
The counsellee, with a grateful look, tells the counsellor, "You have already done
a lot for me. I feel a great sense of relief. I have, in pouring out my problems,
gained an insight into them."
A final year engineering student calls at the Counselling Centre and enquires
whether he could take some psychological tests. The counsellor does not enquir®
as to why the student desires to take the tests but smiles at him .and gives him
appointment. The student arrives at the Centre for the appointment. The counsellor
greets him with a smile and says, "Mr; Rao, you are going to do the talking, I shall
just listen to you. This will give you an opportunity to discuss your problems in the
light of the tests you are going to take." The counsellee sits silently. He is hesitant
Counsellor "You find it difficult to begin talking." Counsellee: "I don't know what
to talk about. I did not expect to talk here. I told you I wanted to take tests."
Counsellor, "You are right, you wanted to lake some tests. You had something 1"
your mind. Feel free and sp^ openly about it I can perhaps understand exactly
what you want" Counsellee: "I want to improve myself and be a success."
The real problem is his talking in general terms. The counsellor, by suitably
structuring the situation, reflects and clarifies the counsellee's feelings. This helps
the counsellee overcome the resistance.
Handling Resistance
Several techniques are suggested for handling resistance. (1) The noting but
disregarding technique is another name for ignoring the symptom by the counsellor.


--- PAGE 195 ---
Counselllnslnterview 175
The counsellor, by resorting to this approach, has much to lose because he will not
be able to break through the resistance by merely ignoring it (2) hi the minor
adaptations technique, the counsellor actively tries to reduce the client's resistance
by whatever methods he can employ. One such technique consists of reducing the
emotional impact of the discussion by moving more towards the cognitive realm
from the affective area. This is a useful technique on its own merits but falls short
of delivering the goods, namely, breaking the resistance. Another minor modification
is to change the pace of transaction. Sometimes clients may experience difficulty
in keeping pace with the counsellor. In such a situation a change in pace would
naturally be helpful. Also the use of humour could, if used judiciously, help reduce
resistance. There can be a danger in this if the humour backtires, that is, has an
awkward effect (3) Another method of reducing resistance is by the temporary
diversion technique. The important element in diversion technique is that of changing
the subject The counsellor could also limit his involvement in the process by
assuming a more detached and disinterested attitude. A common techpique of
diversion is to suggest bibliotherapeutic reading matter. (4) The direct manipulation
technique consists of the counsellor's use of active methods to break the resistance.
This is done by interpreting resistance and thus helping the client to gain insight
into himself. (5) Other manipulations consist of such techniques as reflecting feelings
or resorting to threats. The latter is an extreme form in which the counsellor
announces, "If you do not want to achieve this we will stop doing anything about
it". (6) The last of the techniques suggested is direct confrontation which employs
in-depth questioning concerning the theme of resistance.
SUMMARY
The counselling interview serves to obtain Information from the client and also
acts £is a therapeutic process. It is a matter of common experience that In the
counselling Interview, the counsellor Is often confronted with non-verbal
behaviour. A few counsellees who are vocal may talk freely after the Initial
resistance Is overcome. But most counsellees find it much simpler to grin or to
use gestures, body movements, silence and such other devices to supplement
what they are communicating verbally. A number of counsellees just keep
silent. Frequently these devices may be Ingenious decoys or techniques to
camouflage and/or conceal the real meaning of their expressions. A relatively
inexperienced counsellor may find the situation quite annoying. With a little
experience and patience, the counsellor would certainly find the non-verbal
adjuncts to the verbal expres^ons of counsellees significant and not meaningless.
With the necessary sensittvl^ and keeness of observation the counsellor would
find the non-verbal cues to yield a wealth of Irrformatlon perhaps more significant
than that made available through the spoken words. Non-verbal behaviour Is
seldom unrelated to the expression of feeling on the part of the counsellee. And
certainly It is never random. It Is vdtally related to the verbal expressions of the
counsellee. Words have acquired specific meanings through conventional usage
but non-verbal expresslorrs are not understood for lack of a universal code. This
is understandable. IMfierent individuals may rise dissimilar behavioural expressions
to communicate tiielr feelings and meanings. There could be Individual variations


--- PAGE 196 ---
176 CounseJIli^'antJ Guidance
and some counsellees could be more vocal while others more behavioural In
their expreulon.lhe interpretation ofnon-verbai behavioural cues often poses a
chailen^ng problem to die understanding of IndMduais.
Transference is an Important part of the counselling process In which the
counsellee projects to die coun^Ior attitudes and unresolved feelings from
other human relationships. The resolution oftiansierence feelings Is accomplished
If the counsellor helps the counsellee in managing trcinsference feelings which
are directed to dieir normal goal objects. Counter-transference concerns the
projection of the counsellor's Irrational attitudes to the counsellee. The counsellor's
attitudes play a vital part in die counselling lnten,^ew and the resolution of
counter-transference enhances the counsellor's own personal growth.
One of the ba^c problems ^th which the counsellor Is concerned is that of
overcoming counsellee resistance. Resistance signs serve a useful purpose in
indicating sensitive personally areas and the nature ofa client's defensive strategy.
Tran^ence, counter-transference and resistance are die ever recurring features
In the counselling process. The counsellor naturally must learn to manage them
such that th^ contribute to the counselling goals; otherwise they may lead to
the termination of the counselling relationship.
-;)U. 'tr- ■ '/ •.
'  .'.r. • •
■  'v.-
,s-;
•..A. ' . •»
V. r •
■' •• v .
'• • ■ 1 '• ».* -.N
I A-.n j, ,
.'••a.•■If;.;.;,,, ^


--- PAGE 197 ---
INTRODUCTION
Since counselling is generally considered as a direct one-to-one relation between
the client and the counsellor, it is viewed, as individualistic in its approach. In
recent times, with several cataclysmic changes taking place in society, many
traditional concepts and meanings no longer hold. There have been oemendous
societal pressures and demands such that the one-to-one relation has become
uneconomical and wasteful and may appear to lack social sensitivity and
commitment. In developing countries, for inst^ce, medical services are not available
to a great many people. Opening more training institutions (medical colleges) could
only solve the problem marginally. In the field of counselling also, the available
trained personnel and the demand for competent assistance are alarmingly unrelated.
In this context, group counselling has been thought of as a practical solution.
CASE FOR GROUP COUNSELLING
Renowned therapists like Mesmer, effected their cures in a group setting. It is
argued that in a group setting one could exploit with advantage the group processes
of social facilitation, conformity and suggestion to help promote the therapeutic
process. In a group setting, the individual tends to lose his identity and, therefore,
is less self-conscious and responds more naturally. These and other arguments have
fostered the group approach in counselling in recent times. It also has a gieat
economic appeal. Administrators often turn down proposals on the basis of economic
impracticability. The suggestion of the appointment of a hundred school counsellors
in a district would be viewed with consternation by the management (government)
even though this number may not be adequate to deal with the numbers entering
schools and colleges. One counsellor in a school with two thousand pupils would
be like a drop in the ocean. Granting that as many counsellors as are needed are
appointed the problem of fmding the qualified personnel persists. However, economic
considerations far outweigh professional considerations. There is a psychological
ajqjeal which most protagonists of groiqi guidaince take recourse to. The psychological
appeal derives its substance from the experience of group interaction or interaction
with others which helps develop individual personality. Group interaction helps to
change some attitudes, beliefs, feelings, needs and the lives of individuals in a


--- PAGE 198 ---
178 Counsellingand Guidance
social setting. We know of the bandwagon effect in politics. We also know the
effect of public appeal or consumer appeal on the individual. The experiments of
Asch, Witkin and others have shown that individual perceptions change signiflcantly
in response to group pressures.
There is yet another argument in favour of group counselling. This we may call
the human concern of man towards the members of his society. Great religious
seers and prophets have striven indefatigably to help suffering humanity. Scientists,
explorers and discoverers in their quest to conquer nature have exposed themselves
to imimaginable hazards and subjected themselves to severe privations in the service
of socieQ'. Hippocrates, Socrates and Florence Nightingale have also rendered succour
to humanity. To achieve the goal of relieving suffering, the counsellor should also
strive to give his best to the largest number who need his assistance. This can be
achieved only through the group approach.
emerging field of group counselung
Facerto-face interaction between the counsellee and counsellor has been considered
as counselling in which the counsellor helps in resolving the counsellee's problem(s).
There are practical situations, however, in which a counsellee directly involves
othCT.members who may be his family or members of his group. In such a situationindividual counselling may not be quite effective. Group counselling thus becomes
a practical means of helping to resolve problems by harnessing the social processof group dynamics, social facilitation, and so on. The method offers promising
possibilities of resolving inter-personal conflicts. Group counselling could be lookedu^n as an extension of individual counselling in which free communicationbetween members is encouraged and maintained, leading to an understanding and
evaluation of each others' points of view. Before presenting one's own point of^ew It is necessary to grasp the other person's frame of reference to understand his
feelinp..By this process heated emotions are allowed to cool off,g to a discussion by which differences can be resolved, if not eliminated. In
e ^oup approach the potential negative feelings and emotions concerning other
membere are eliminated from the debate. The practical significance of this approaches m the fact that there is no question of.one member losing and the other member
gaiiung, but is the outcome of consensus or the best solution.
^i^llors are often confronted with individuals with similar problems. They^y d It profitable to arrange for a meeting as a group of all the subjects withim^ ar problems. This method is called group therapy, and it helps if persons
oth^ have difficulties similar to their own. The aims of group counselling
of individual counselling except that there are certain additional11 g features in the former. A conducive environment is created, resistances
are towered and the release of tadividaal tensions is faeiiitated.
roups may differ from one another in many respects. We know of primary and
secondary groups. The distinguishing feature of a primary group is that it usuallytends to be small such that there could be a face-to-face and direct interaction.
Often pnmary groups are defined as comprising members of a family. But it need


--- PAGE 199 ---
Croup Counselling 179
not necessarily be so. The secondary group is a larger group and may seldom have
face-to-face interactions. Further, groups are also defined as in-groups and out-
groups. The in-groups are not always well knit homogeneous groups with a defined
purpose as contrast^ with the out-group. Members who do not belong to the in-
group are perceived as members belonging to the out-group. Groups may have
several heterogenities, for example, the members comprising a family may not all
be of the same age, members comprising a school class may hail from different
socio-economic backgrounds, and so on.
STRUCTURING GROUPS
In counselling, the term 'group' is used with a certain connotation. The groups, in
group counselling are generally small, normally limited to a manageable size of
about six or ten membersTThe second consideration is that all the members in the
group should have similar problems or difficulties requiring assistance. Thus the
counselling group is a homogeneous group with respect to the purpose for which
the members of the group have been assembled. Prior to their meeting one anotho'
at the initial session, the members could be strangers to one another. It is the
Qpunsellor's prerogative to choose the members or the group. The members of a
group have a common goal, namely, to overcome their problem or to find a
solutidn to their problem. The counsellor's approach can be a non-directive one or
a directive one, depending on tne level (age or educational) of the group. If the
group comprises matore clients, the counsellor may take the non-directive approach.
On the other hand, if the members are boys or girls who are relatively immature
the counsellor has to use the directive ^proacH.
It should, however, be recognized that group counselling cannot be resorted to
for any and every kind of problem. Only certain kinds of problems lend themselves
easily to group counselling procedures. For instance, the question of vocational
choice could be treated with advantage employing the group ^proach. A behavioural
modification problem, for example, smoking, could also be treated in a group
setting. But problems conconing deep psychological conflicts may not be amenable
to group techniques.
There is a very significant professional and ethical consideratitm that underlies
this counselling service confidentiality. Clients entrust their confidences and it is
unethical and unprofessional to divulge them. In a group-counselling situation
problems which do not involve questions of confidentiality alone can be treated.
Vocational choice which we alluded to is a very tqipropriate theme. Indeed, it
would be better to treat it in a group setting rather than discuss the vocational
problems and choices of each client individually.
Effective group counselling does not m^ that individual members are allowed
complete freedom. While freedom is necessary to some extent, too much of it may
make some members feel frustrated and disturbed leading to the danger of the
group eventually breaking-up.


--- PAGE 200 ---
180 CounselUns^'^ Culdance
UMITATIONS AND ASSUMPTIONS OF GROUP COUNSELLING
Group counselling is not suitable for all subjects and for all situations. It is advisable
not to use it with p^ons who have deep unconscious conflicts. It is not suitable
for psychopaths and subjects with high levels of anxie^. It is not expected to bring
about profound changes in personality structure. It can best be viewed as a kind of
supportive technique for the normal counsellees. An integration of group sessions
with individual sessions has been found effective in many instances.
Group counselling is based on certain assumptions:
The assumption is that individuals should possess the necessary latent capacity
to trust and to be trusted by other group members. They should exhibit a basic
concern for other group members. This permits group cohesion and provides an
atmosphere of support and securi^ for each member of the group to experience and
share individual problems. Lack of trust and feelings of social guilt found among
disruptive adolescents cannot lead to any deep relationships within the group and
such individuals 'cannot become concerned about others. The group counselling
technique is not successful in such cases.
The second assumption about group participation is that "each individual has the
potential to take responsibility for self-change" (Schwartz, 1976). Persons may
exhibit the desire to modify their life styles. Disruptive adolescents perceive their
life styles as fixed and feel powerless to deal with the social environment. They feel
that theirestiaints and control exerted by others leave them with no alternative but
to take ^pcourse to fighting, stealing, deception, etc. They do not accept that something is Y^rong or deficient in themselves and that they must try to rectify it. Rather,
they feel forced into situations in which they are compelled to take certain actions.
The third assumption is that group members can leam and understand from the
objectives and methodology of group processes. Instead of being goal-oriented the
individuals may be impulsive, instead of being interdependent they may act only
out of immediate self-interest, instead of being empathetic they may feel insulated,
instead of accepting their feelings they may disclaim them. In the group approach,
expectations must be dealt with first. The distortations, confusions and ignorance
of the members have to be dispelled. The counsellors' objective should be to
reform them and not to make them conform. The misconceptions must be dealt
with one at a time and cleared to make individual participation free and open.
Didactic instrucdon facilitates affected learning. Dealing with mistrust is important
because mistrust inhibits group cohesiveness. Self-responsibility is focussed as a
primary goal. A decision involves a choice and a denial which sometimes leads to
disappointment The members must be made to accept disappointment as part of
everyday living without being plagued with feelings of guilt. The objective is to
leam that there is always a choice to be made which may mean denying oneself
something else.
The last assumption is learning problem-solving skills. As the members of a
group talk, the leader explains, compares, distinguishes and summarizes. The
group discusses possible solutions and the rationale for each proposed alternative.
The proposed solutions are then discussed in the light of the techniques to be
employed.


--- PAGE 201 ---
Croup Counselling 181
MECHANICS OF GROUP COUNSEUING
In the group setting the subjects meet at em appointed hour. The counsellor would
introduce the members of the group to one another and commences the session with
an opening statement that is aimed at starting the discussion. He could speak of the
importance of vocations and suggest that young people should think deeply and
make an appropriate vocational choice. A member in the group could start with a
statement of his vocational plan. Others would respond by reacting to his plans. He
could ask for suggestions, define his own position and defend his choice, rejecting
suggestions that do not conform to his thinking. In this process, each member of
the group cannot only think aloud but help clarify his own and others' portions as
well. In dealing with academic problems sometimes it may be useful to employ
group techniques. For instance, if the group is considering the problem of study
skills and practices, each person present can benefit from the experience of other
members in the group. This helps identify one's own weaknesses and strengths. It
promotes self-discovery and self-understanding. A counsellor in an individual setting
may spend several hours, during which a client may be put on the defensive such
that he does not see his own weakness but tries to evade it or to explain it away.
Group techniques are best suited to vocational or educational counselling.
In group counselling the size of the groups is usually kept small such that
individual contact and close proximity enable free and effective interaction between
the members of the group. The group counsellor has the primary responsibility of
selecting the members for a group. The criteria normally employed in the selection
of members are: (I) the subjects have a common goal, (2) they belong to the same
age group, (3) they have similar, if not identical, problems and (4) they have a
capacity for self-direction. The other Qpes of groups include guidance groups,
family groups, T-groups, special therapy groups, marathon groups and other special
groups.
TYPES OF GROUPS
The guidance group is usually a group which seeks information. Here the emphasis
is on imparting information. However, there are other views which discount this
suggestion. For example, Bennett (1963) holds that group guidance is not confmed
to the giving of information. It is meant to provide opportunities for learning with
emphasis on self-direction through the provision of assistance and orientation in'
new educational settings for the efficient use of available facilities and opportunities.
Group study of problems of inter-personal relations in school and college life can
modify both individual and group behaviour in socially acceptable ways. Problems
of growing up, making adult adjustments, using the principles of mental hygiene
in living, and appraising personal attitudes, interests, abilities and personality for
better personal and social adjustments, could be dealt with by the group approach.
Group study and the application of efficient methods of learning and group stody
about occupational life and problems of occupational adjustment and progress,
could also be effectively considered by group guidance. In addition, guidance groups


--- PAGE 202 ---
182 CounsefUngandGuidance
are also intended to provide for the therapeutic effects of group procedures (1)
through an understanding of common human problems, (2) the release of emotional
tensions through increased insight into personality dynamics, (3) the objectives of
guidance and how to secure them more economically and effectively than would
be possible in an individual approach, (4) the implementation of individual
counselling and how to make it more effective through background study of common
aspects of problems and the reduction or elimination of many emotional barriers
through the discussion of unique aspects of common human problems.
The above description of group guidance brings it very close to group instruction.
When the teacher is the centre of activities, the term 'group instruction' is more
appropriate. On the other hand, if the emphasis is on the members of the group the
term 'group guidance' is suitable.
GROUP COUNSELLING—ns VALUE
According to Mahler (1969), group counselling is important to:
1. Learn to understand other people and their viewpoints.
2. Develop a deeper respect for other pecqjle, particutoly those who are different
in many ways from oneself.
3. Gam greater social skills in dealing with peers.
4. Learn to share with other people a sense of belonging by participating in
group activities.
5. Clarify one's own concerns, problems, values and ideas through discussion
with others having similar problems in like areas.
In the educational setting group counselling is of great value in:
1. Exploring what it means to be a person—^"Who am I really?" "What do I
want out of life?"
2. Developing greater confidence in one's own perceptions—"I know this is
what I must do, even if my parents do not agree".
3. Learning to understand other pec^jle belter and leaming to really listen to
others—"I can attune myself to what people are saying, what they are really
trying to express. It amazes me that people can feel so differently about the
same experience".
4. Integrating one's feelings and thinking—"I never thought about why...was
behaving the way he did.... Now I can understand him".
5. Be»ming more effective in social situations—'1 am not so afraid of meeting
pet^le and talking with them.
Group counselling helps in re-examining one's present values and trying outnew v^ues—"I always did what I felt like without thinking about others. Now I
appreciate that it is nice to think about others before deciding to do what I want".
It provides a climate for a healthy exploration of feelings and control of them—'1
had so many reservations, never could I be so fiank and express myself, and
promotes leaming how to be more responsible for one's own behaviour—'1 used


--- PAGE 203 ---
Croup Counselling 183
to spend so much time fighting every one and had not enough time knowing what
I really wanted to do". It explores one's relationships with other people such as
authority figures, parents, teachws, siblings, peer^r-'l always wondered why people
did not seem to want me for a close fnend, but now I am beginning to undp^rstand
why". For the counsellor, these basic purposes can provide a frame of reference and
can also give direction to his efrbrts.
In group counselling a single counsellor is involved in a simultaneous relationship
with a number of clients or counsellees. His concern is generally with development^
problems and common situational concerns of individual members. The primary
goal of group counselling is the creation of an inter-personal climate which helps
each individual to develop an insight into himself and to achieve healthier personal
adjustment The vehicle for accomplishing this goal is the discussion of personal
concerns at an affective level (Bonney, 1965).
Group counselling, according to some counsellors, is essendally prophylactic in
nature. The major thrust is to prevent problems from assuming or becoming disturbing
and irksome to the individuaL Group counselling is described by Cohn et al. (1963)
as a dynamic inter-personal process through which individuals within the normal
range of adjustment, work within a peer group and with a professionally trained
counsellor, exploring problems and feelings in an attempt to modify their own
altitudes so that they are better able to deal with developmental problems. According
to this definition, group counselling is problem-centred and feeling-oriented.
Reflection and clarification of feelings and modification of altitudes are its main
"objectives. The basic concern thus is with helping members with their problems
and experiences; the emphasis is upon growth and adjustment, that is, promotion
of 'growth motives' rather than upon the cure of deficit behaviour by attending to
'deficiency needs'. The adolescent groups characteristically exhibit conflicts arising
from sibling rivalry, independence-dependence and other similar concerns.
A few counsellors suggest the use of the term 'multiple counselling' rather thaii
group counselling andjustify their standpoint by arguing that the participants ex^xtise
a mutual therapeutic effect upon one another. But in general usage, the term multiple
counselling has come to be employed in situations where more than one counsellor
participates in the group counselling process with the counsellees.
T-groups are also referred to as sensitivity groups. The T-group technique was
formulated in 1947 by the National Training Laboratory, Bethel Maine, USA for
developing inter-p^onal skills and sensitivity to communications. The essential
feature of T-groups is that the p^cipant leams from his own behaviour elucidated
while participating in a T-group. The T-group is an unstructured group comprising
10 to 12 persons among whom inter-personal relationships and behaviour patterns
are of significance. The members leam to rwognize the effect they have on others
and how others see them. This technique helps people to probe the strengths and
weaknesses of each other's personaliQ^ in an unstructured atmosphere. The T-
groups differ in a number of ways from the therapy groups. They utilize data about
present behaviour and its consequences rather than delve into genetic causes. Th^
deal with conscious and subconscious behaviour rather than with unconscious
motivation.
In group therapy, therapeutic principles are appli^ to two or more tndividuais


--- PAGE 204 ---
"1
184 Counsdllngand Guidance
simultaneously. The main object is to clarify their psychological conflicts so that
they may live normally. Group therapy is not suitable for seriously disturbed
individuals with deeper personality problems. There are several therapy groups
depending on the major objective or goal of therapy. For example, 'alcoholics
anonymous' is an example of a special therapy group.
l^larathon groups are groups in continuous session extending over very long
durations ranging from 12 to 48 hours. Members explore thoroughly their views
about themselves, their aspirations and goals, their relationships with others, their
prejudices, and so on. By facing these challenging issues the members strive to
develop an open, authentic and responsible attitude.
\JF^ PROCESS OF GROUP COUNSELLING -
Group counselling ordinarily involves five stages, namely (1) the formation of the
group, (2) the involvement stage, (3) the transition stage, (4) the working stage and
(5) the ending stage.
Group counselling programmes are organized to cater to a wide variety of needs.
The objective is of primary importance in organizing any group for this programme.
For what purpose is the group being organized? This will largely and broadly
determine the otha* steps in the formation of the group.
Selection of members—This is perhaps the most crucial step. As stated earlier,
the members of a group have common goals and are largely homogeneous. While
homogeneous grouping in relation to age and maturity is viewed as desirable,
comprising the group slightly differently has often been found to yield desirable
results. Therefore, the groups can comprise individuals of different age levels or of
different sexes. There are certain basic guidelines in selecting individuals who
comprise a group. Individual counselling is recommended very often as a preliminary
step in the selection of members for a group. This step was found to help prevent
individuals from withdrawing during the group counselling sessions. It should be
noted that the very aggressive, the very shy and the seriously maladjusted cannot
be put into the same group. The previous relationship of the members should also
be considered; close friends and relatives should not be in the same group.
Size ofthe group—Opinions differ concerning the exact number in a group. Six
is the number suggested by some, while others are prepared to go as far as twelve?
What has to be borne in mind is that, as the group increases in size, collateral
relationships are often weakened. The tendency to depend on the counsellor rather
than upon one another becomes increasingly evident. Frequently, when the size of
the group increases, the counsellor is found to talk more to the group as a whole
rather than to the members as individuals.
Frequency of sessions—Some recommend weekly sessions while others two
sessions per week. More fequent sessions may not be productive because the
individuals would have no chance to think over the experience of previous sessions.
Duration of sessions—This Obviously depends on several factors. Children cannot
be engaged fruitfully for sessions longer than of 30 minutes duration. But with
adults the sessions can be longer—usually ofan hour and a half duration. However,


--- PAGE 205 ---
Croup Counsefllng 185
in such sessions, the first part appears to be more productive and fruitful than the
latter part.
Duration of the group—Ahoxa. ten sessions are considered the minimum for
most group counselling programmes. Several counsellors emphasize 'identity
seeking' as a major objective of group counselling. In order that every member gets
at least one opportunity to participate fully there should be a minimum often sessions.
Setting—The group counselling room should be of a reasonable sizo—it should
neither give a feeling of overcrowding nor of emptiness. It should be free from
outside distractions such that the client's privacy is not infnnged upon. A large
table and chairs around it may be useful in ensuring ease of participation.
Preparation of members for group participation—^Much attention needs to be
paid to preparation by the leader (counsellor). It would be helpful if individual
interviews were arranged with each potential member. By this procedure the
counsellor knows in advance the members, their needs, problems, experience, etc.
After this preliminary step, the counsellor can select the members to form the
group. The members should be informed of the general objectives and mechanics
of the functioning of the counselling group. The members should know their
responsibilities.
How to get started—The counsellor often has to explain his role and also how
the group should function if results are to be obtained. The counsellor underlines
the main theme, namely, that each member has the responsibili^ of understanding
and helping each of the other members as well as striving to solve his own problems.
Membws are encouraged to share their ideas and feelings frankly and freely.
Confidentiali^, of course, is the requisite for developing mutual trust and each
member has to take responsibility for confidentiality. The nature of the relationship
in a group counselling situation is similar to the one found in individual coimselling
situations. In addition, the relationship in group counselling can be reciprocal and
inter-personal between members if such a relationship has therapeutic potential.
Open or closed group—Groups can be closed and continuous. A closed group
is one whose membership is fixed. If any of its members withdraw during the
course of counselling their places remain unfilled for the rest of the sessions. A
continuous group, on the other hand, is less rigid and permits members to leave at
will and new members to join at whatever stage they desire. Hiis open-group
system has several serious limitations, such as problems of communication,
acceptance, support, doubt, etc. But the closed group sometimes becomes infiructuous
when the counsellor is confronted with a situation in which his group has dwindled
away to a ridiculously small size.
Voluntary or involuntary participation—Though counselling is avowedly
voluntary^ attendance can become a crucial matter. If some members are irregular,
it may have adverse effects on others. The members may feel a sense of
putposelessness if members attend or do not attend ad libitium.
Overcoming resistance—A problem in group counselling is how to get the
discussion started. Usually counsellors employ the technique of going round in
which each member says why he is in the group, what he hopes to accomplish and
how he is going to profit from this situation. In individual counselling usually
resistance is encountered. Even in the group situation there may be resistance but


--- PAGE 206 ---
186 Counsellingand Guidance
it becomes less significant because ^yben one member ceases to talk another may
step in to sustain the process. A member who is resistant initially may find it more
easy to verbalize his ideas and feelings after listening to the narration of another
member of the group. Thus each member is encouraged to shed his fears or shyness
and express his feelings. The counsellor's responsibility in the group counselling
ciinariftn is no different than in the individual counselling situation. Sometimes the
counsellor may encourage role playing in group counselling. Role playing has often
been found to increase spontanei^ of response and provide for free expression of
feeling.
Ending the group—^The group should meet until the objectives have been attained.
The members may be involved in the process of ending the group. They could
evaluate the gains made by each of (hem individually and arrive at a unanimous
conclusion that (he group may now be ended.
INDIVIDUAL AND GROUP COUNSELLING SIMILARmES
1. The objectives of both are almost similar. Both techniques aim at helping
the counsellee achieve self-integration, self-direction and responsibility.
2. In both the techniques, the counsellor presents an accepting, permissive
climate for the clients to participate freely such that their defenses are reduced.
3. Both techniques aim at clarif^ng feelings, restatement of content, and the
like. The counsellor helps the clients to become aware of their feelings and
attitudes and also to examine them. The members who receive help in both
the techniques are normal individuals who have common developmental
problems concerning needs, interests, aspirations, etc.
4. Both approaches provide for privacy and confidentiality of relationship.
DIFIERENCES BETWEEN INDIVIDUAL AND GROUP COUNSELLING
1. Individualized counselling is a one-to-one, face-to-face relationship marked
by intimacy, warmth and rapport between the counsellor and counsellee. In
group counselling there is the physical proximity of other members with
perii^s similar problems. The client may obtain solace from the knowledge
that he is not the only one with problems and that there are others who have
similar problem's.
2. In grotip counselling, unlike in individualized counselling, the counsellees
not only receive help but also give help to others. The more cohesive the
group, the more are the members able to help one another. This cooperative
feeling brings the members closer, which in turn helps in facilitating the
muUial expression of feelings.
3. The counsellor's task is somewhat more complex in group counselling. He
has not only to follow, sense and appreciate what a member says but also
how this affects other members and their reactions. The counsellor in a
group counselling situation has more demands to meet and satisfy.


--- PAGE 207 ---
Croup Counselllrig 187
Group counselling is no substitute for individual counselling. There are certain
obvious limitations in group counselling. Individual counselling should be resorted
to for deeper problems of an intimate and sensitive nature which by their very
nature preclude the group approach. Therefore, it would not only be fallacious but
detrimental if one is sought to be substituted for the other.
SUMMARY
While It Is broadly recognized that counselling is a face-to-face, direct Interaction
between the CQunsellor and the counsellee, for over the last two decades, group
approaches have come to be largely used In several specific situations and th^
have been found to be useful. The dearth of trained personnel on the one hand,
and the Increasing demand for professional eisslstance on the other, have led to
the use of group approaches In counsdilng. This approadi provides for the
operation of soda] processes of Imitation, fadlltatlon, suggestion and release of
tension In dients. It has been useful In certain areas like training work groups,
study groups, management groups and soda! groups. This approach is now
sought to Ik extended to the sphere of counselling also.
Counselling In groups requires spedal procedures. Qu-e has to be taken In
iissembllng the therapy group. In homogeneous groups a small number of
members experlendng similar problems are chosen. The counsellor performs
the Introductions In the Initial session and sets the group In action. The groups
may meet for a few sesdons and profit from the counselling experience.
Some counsellors do not encourage the dropping out of members from the
group before the conduslon of the programme. Other counsellors permit
members to drop out eind new members to Join midway through sessions.
There are different kinds of groups of which the marathon groups have
become very popular. The group sits through long sessions extending beyond
12 hours.
Group counselling has been found to be mostvaluable In vocational counselIIr\g
and educational counselling leading to better curricular choices and Improvement
of study skills.
Group counselling Is contra-Indicated for Individuals having serious
p^cholo^cal problems. Group counselling should not be a substitute for
Individual counselling. It Is always advantageous If both the techniques are used
to supplement each other whenever it is practicable.


--- PAGE 208 ---
■  10
luSdaimcm and ComBeHliniM in
e
s?
A. EDUCATIONAL GUIDANCE
^ of-"-
INTRODUCTION
The crucial role of emotions in an individual's development and struggle for
fulfilment has not received adequate attention in education. Bolton (1931) draws
attention to this lactina. He holds that the pupil's attitudes towards society and its
problems, religion and morals, his duties and obligations are vastly more important
than the few i^s of intellectual knowledge imparted in school. The pupil, as he
grows, learns-the interests, aspirations, dilemmas, fears, anxieties and attitudes of
the people who are immediately around him—his family, his school mates, his
teachers and others. The pupil's likes and dislikes, his longings and aversions, his
loves and hates, will really determine the manner in which he behaves as a human
being and adjusts himself to the demands of the society and environment. Emotions
have both positive and negative aspects. The guidance counsellor can help clarify
to the pupil the role of positive emotions that are constructive and integrative, that
of negative emotions that aie disinteg^ve and disruptive, and help the pupil
appreciate the part they play in his life^The basic aim of guidance is to magnifythe power of the positive and integrative emotions and to minimize the role of
negative and disintegrative emotions such that they are of service to the individual
iiuhis development and adjustmenU
(Every individual has certain :;{dues and makes choices based on them. Therefore,
children must be taught values^ohnson concludes that a common symptom of
most maladjustments is a sense^f vagueness, an inability to clearly communicate
feelings and ideas to others. This sense of helplessness grows out of a lack of
clarity in value orientations.^uidance helps in facilitating the ability to communicated
"The fundamental premise of all guidance is a basic faith in the improvability of-a
human being—its optimistic orientation. Unlike other living creatures, human beings
have a long period of preparation for adult life which can be used with advantage
in education. The commonly-held belief that man is prone to make errors during
childhood owing to his delicate nature is fallacious. The idea that the errors committed
in childhood affect the individual for life is equally untenable. The contrary is true.


--- PAGE 209 ---
Guidance and Counselling In the Educational Setting 189
Human beings are fascinatingly tough and resilient, both physically and emotionally.
They survive deprivation, discrimination and ill treatmenL They may sometimes
make mistakes which can almost always be remedied. Therefore, what is essential
is to prevent the development of self-defeating atdtudes and habits.
It is equally fallacious to believe that people should be forced to learn. A human
being is fundamentally a growing, seeking, exploring organism. It is erroneously
believed after Cannon that the tendency to seek equilibrium, repose and stability
(all different states of homeostasis) is b^ic to human adjustment However, in real
life, we find several exceptions to man's urge for homeostatic balance and stability.
Menninger and others (1963) indicated that there is an important opposite tendency
to homeostasis which they call 'heterostasis'. This essentially is an urge to break
homeostasis in search of adventure and experiment that are apparently threatening
and dangerous. A simple illustration of heterostasis is the young child's repeated
efforts to walk in spite of the number of times he fails to balance himself and fells.
Yet, he struggles and keeps trying. This suggests that the growing individual wants
to learn. The notion that human beings will not leam unless they are forced to is
certainly not true. Normally healthy children pursue tasks eagerly and willingly and
exhibit a sense of thrill of achievement when they leam. The child says excitedly
'Mummy I can write*, 'I drew this picture', etc. Unfortunately, this enthusiasm is
stultified and the thrill of trying and learning disappears when the learner is forced
to leam. In school/college the practice of awarding inconsequential marks, grades,-
prizes, passes, etc. are confused with the real outcomes of learning. The pupil's
failure to secure these grades, marks, prizes, etc. become a source of humiliation
and leads to the growth of feelings of inadequacy and inferiority. If the learners are
encouraged to develop their personal resources, they would turn out to be successful
in different fields. The apparent fact that some pupils respond productively to
marks, prizes, etc., leaves the motivational needs of the majority of pupils unattended.
The educational process ceases to be enjoyable to this neglected majority. It is
necessary to realize that while textual learning is important, the learning of self-
confidence, cooperation, curiosity; persistence, inferiority, alienation, etc., is more
important in order to develop a wholesome personality. Every human being seeks
self-expression to become an individual. This tendency is most visible during
adolescence. The search for identity is also found to be persistent during the
adolescent years. The youth has great potential to become whatevCT his perception
of himself allows and whatever his culture provides as inspiration. An individual
is neither a victim of his heredity nor a helpless pawn of his environment In reality,
both these interact, and the result depends upon the quality of choices he makes.
This implies a basic factCH* of human life, viz., that the course of an individual's life
depends on the choices that he makes. He faces dilemmas, pressures and iricsome
problems which he can resolve by making appropriate choices, i^e., by adjusting
himself. The history of human civilization is a testimony to the choices made by
humans to meet dilemmas, problems and conflicts which led to their progress or
failures.
The school and classroom are marked by diversity rather than similarity. This
is because pupils come from different socio-economic groups and communities.
But what is more sigmficant is the basic educational objective that is essentially


--- PAGE 210 ---
190 Counselling and Guidance
concerned with the development of pupils uniqueness, both personally and
vocationally.
Guidance is conconed with development through adjustment and therefore, ought
to be designed to individualize educational programmes. The school should have
a total programme, of which guidance is an integral part The constant concern
should be to wihance learning by providing a suitable climate at school/college and
at the same time to minimize the constricting and interfering factors. Guidance on
an individual basis aims at enhancing the c^>acity for more effective choice-making.
GUIDANCE NEEDS RELATED TO EDUCATION
At school or college, a variety of problems may arise in the minds of the growing
pupils. The problems fall into thr^ categories. They are problems of:
1. Learning
2. PreparaUon for vocation
3. Sex and interpersonal relations.
Learning Problems
The growing pupil becomes interested in a variety of things around him and comes
to devote undue attention to distractions, to the detriment of his smdies. Consequently,
he may perform poorly at school/college. A number of other factors may lead to
several academic problems. Some pupils may have reading difficulties, their rate of
reading may be slow and comprehension poor. Some may develop likes and dislikes
with regard to subjects which may adversely affect performance. Poor performance
may lead to other problems like loss of interest in studies, irregularity of attendance,
truancy, and other minor delinquencies. A good programme of guidance could
initiate steps to overcome this and prevent deterioration. A sound guidance
programme may help take appropriate steps to develop the necessary remedial
programmes at the right moment. Counselling could help the pupil gain insight into
himself, understand his own problems in their proper perspective and cooperate
with the school/college authorities to overcome the problems and to promote
academic excellence.
Problems Concerning VocerioiMl Future
The individual student at the completion of secondary school/college faces the
question: 'What next'? This is an impoitanl area to which our secondary schools/
colleges pay little attention. Most schools/colleges do not concern themselves with
this vital issue of the pupils' vocational future; It is in this area that the school/
college can play a very important role. The guidance counsellor can help the pupils
gain greatm* self-understanding so that they know what they want to do; It is
distressing to find that even college students do not have any clear ideas about their
future. When asked what they proposed to do after college, over 85 per cwt'bf the
college students interviewed responded with: T haven't thought about it yet'. Most
young people do not have sufOcient self-knowledge. A good guidance programme


--- PAGE 211 ---
Guidance and Counselling In tiie EducaOonal Setting 191
should cater to this vital need. The guidance counsellor, by employing standard
psychological instruments, can assess the abilities, aptitudes, interests, etc., of the
pupils, give them self-understanding and help them think for themselves with
sufficient self-knowledge. Pupils may be ^ven informative talks on careers and be
m^ to participate in group discussions about their future. Writing brief compositions
on themes such as 'What I want to get out of life or in life', 'The job I would like
to pursue', 'What I expect from my job', 'Thejobldo not like to pursue', etc., will
help clarify sonie of their ideas.
Many parents, owing to ignorance of the psychological characteristics of their
children, decide their future unilaterally. Pupils reported'^that their parents wanted
them to become doctors/engineers and so on. Parents often seek vicarious
gratification—^what they themselves failed to achieve, they want their children to
achieve. Thus the vocational aspirations of pupils get suppressed. The guidance
counsellor should encourage the pupils to think about the different kinds of
occupations that may suit them. Pupils should be helped to make wise choices from
increased self-understanding and understanding of the occupational world, f ' '
Problems of Sex and Interpersonal Relations
Another important concern of guidance is related to pupils' personal growth and
development'Owing to the natural growth process, pupils become more sensitive
and self-conscious about their physical changes and experience emotional
disturbances. Physical growth opens up a new world. The imbalance between
physiological and psychological development leads to emotional difficulties.and
maladjustment The young persons may become increasingly self-absorbed. The
counsellor understan^ng these problems can give them the required informa^on,
for self-understanding and guid^ce.,
Further, the social development of the young has not received necessary attention.
Most pupils do not know how to behave in a group. They tend to be timid, shy,
self-conscious and generally avoid meeting people. The counsellor can, by infusing
them with self-confidence, help them overcome these problems of social adjusuneni.
A few young people may be aggressive, ill-mannered and crude. This again is due
to lack of social adjustment It is the responsibility of the school to do something
about this aspect of the pupils' life. The home too has a great responsibility in this
regard. However, in our country a majority of students are first-generation learners.
Therefore, the school must assume greater responsibility in assisting pupils' personal
development
At the end of the secondary school, a number of pupils desire to go to college.
Vocational guidance is essential at this juncture. It provides assistance in choosing,
prq)aring for, entering into and making progress in an occupation. The fundamental
objective is to help the youth choose occupations with Knowledge and understanding
and not to allow them to drift aimlessly.y
APTITUDES AND INTERESTS
An aptitude is the potential for a specific skill which can be improved by suitable


--- PAGE 212 ---
192 Counselling and Guidance
training. For example, a person with" an aptitude for music, provided with the
necessary training, can develop the ability to a great extent On the other hand, if
a person has no aptitude fOT music, no amount of trmning can bring about any
apiHtciable improvement in his performance. There is some confusion about whether
an ^titude is innate, inborn or acquired.
A comparison of the terms 'achievement', 'aptitude' and 'ability' may help
understand them better. Achievement depends on past experience and training i.e.,
from an individual's present performance one can judge how much the individual
has benefited or profited fiom the past training or learning. Aptitude is concerned
with the future performance, i.e., what can be achieved if a certain type of training
appropriate to the ^11 concerned is given to the individual. Ability is concerned
with the present. It indicates what the individual is capable of achieving in the
present situation. Abili^ is also popularly known as 'intelligence'. Intelligence is
flexibility and versatility in the use of symbolic processes, i.e., the capacity to
symbolically manipulate the environment for adjustment or to find a solution to a
problem, leading to better adjustment. Aptitude and intelligence have great simi^ty.
However, they should not be confused with one another. While aptitude refers to
what an individual may become (in the future with special training), intelligence
implies what a person is capable of doing here and now. Intelligence does not
improve with training. An aptitude is a natural potential of a specific nature which
can be improved with specific training. For example, a person with artistic or
musical aptitude, provided the necessary specific training, can develop the ability
to a great extent.
Intelligence is assessed by administering different kinds of psychological tests
popularly known as 'intelligence tests'. There are different kinds of intelligence
tests:
1. Veibal and non-verbal
2. Individual and group
3. Performance
4. Speed and power
Verbal and non-verbal tests can be administered as individual and group tests.
However, the performance type of non-verbal tests can be administered only as
individual tests. Group tests are speed tests, i.e., those taking the tests are required
to complete the test within a stipulated time-limit. Power tests can be strictly
administered as individual tests. Speed tests assess the efficiency of performance
(assuming that necessary care has been taken to ensure the motivation and sincerity
of subjects taking the tests). Power tests, on the other hand, assess 'capacity', i.e.,
the presence of innate general ability. The tests have no time or speed limits.
However, the subjects have to complete the tests as early as possible but without
haste.
Aptitudes are assessed by administering what are called 'Aptitude tests* which
are usually a composite or battery of a number of tests. The most popular tests of
aptitude are: the Differential Aptitude Tests (DAT), General Aptitude Test Battery
(GATE), Multi-Aptitude Tests (MA'H, etc. Aptitude for any task generally consists
of sev^ factors. An adequate aptitude test is one that would measure all the


--- PAGE 213 ---
Guidance and CounseJlli^ In the Educadonai Setting 193
factors necessary for success in a specific field. This goal is impractical and cannot
be achieved. Tests of Scholastic aptitude, Mechanical aptitude, Engineering aptitude.
Medical aptitude. Legal aptitude, etc. are sometimes used. These are not specific
but a combination of many aptiuides. Estimates of accuracy of apdtude tests vary
with the person using them. Some tests are said to be highly accurate. Tests valid
for one job may not be valid for another. The use of aptiuide tests should proceed
on an individual and clinical basis rather than on a normative basis.
Use of Aptitude Tests In Vocatlona] Guidance
Case ofB^mesh
Ramesh was administered the DAT. His scores on the different sub-tests were:
Veibal reasoning 45 percentile. Numerical ability 75 percentile. Abstract reasoning
65 percentile; Spatial relations 70 percentile; Mechanical reasoning 70 percentile;
Clerical speed and accuracy 25 percentile; Language usage—(a) Spelling 10
percentile and (b) Sentence usage 15 percentile. It can be seen that Ramesh scored
high in numerical, abstract, spatial and mechanical reasoning. His verbal reasoning
was average. His performance in language usage and clerical speed and accuracy
was poor. The counsellor read the scores to the subject (Ramesh) and asked him
to state the kind of courses/occupations he would like to pursue in the light of his
scores. The counsellor drew the subject's attention to his high scores and asked him
to comment on what they suggested. Would he be successful in any other courses/
occupations involving his abilities?
Aptitude tests are useful in gleaning important information about persons. They
are used in the selection of candidates for several trades. The information thus
obtained can help subjects gain better self-understanding and provide guidance in
makmg proper educational and vocational choices. However, it is essential to bear
in mind that aptitude-test scores are only broadly indicative of the probable success
of the individual in a specific area. The guidance worker must exercise extreme
caution in interpreting the test results. The information should be used to help the
concerned pupil know his own strengths and weaknesses. The counsellor should
encourage the pupil to think and reason out the possible choices available. The
counsellor should always highlight the scores obtained by the pupil and assure a
positive approach in encouraging the pupil to make his own choice. The counsellor
may discuss the choice to help the pupil understand more critically the nature of
the choice made. In the process, the pupil may modify or change his choice(s}.
Another important use of achievement and aptitude tests taken together is to suggest
suitable remedial programmes, if necessary.
Interests
Interests form an integral aspect of an individual's personality. They indicate an
individual's likes or preferences. Interests may-be either extrinsic or intrinsic in
nature. Extrinsic interests are connected with the pursuit of different activities
which give rise to satisfaction or pleasure. Intrinsic interests are those connected
with the pursuit of the activity itself. An intrinsic interest centred on the activity
itself is a more basic or real interest However, differentiation is not easy. Sometimes


--- PAGE 214 ---
194 Counselling and Guidance
an interest may be intrinsic, sometimes extrinsic, e.g., playing tennis or cricket for
the sake of playing is an intrinsic interest. The individual derives pleasure from
playing the game. Playing the same game to earn a reward or trophy or title is an
e^urinsic interest. Pleasure lies in winning the money or trophy or title. Interests are
not like aptitudes. They are acquired by the individual in the course of his
development Some interests may be present at one time and may disappear later.
Interests are not permanent They may be changed or modified during one's lifetime.
All the interests of an individual rarely last long. However, certain basic interests
seem to last for a lifetime. At school we expect the pupils to be interested in
reading books, playing games, etc. When they grow up and start working, some
may continue the interest of reading books and some may continue the interest of
playing games.
There are a large number of interests, some simple and some quite complex.
Stamp collection, for example, is a simple interest which may preoccupy-some
pupils for some time, but may be forgotten after a few years. But for some individuals
it may develop into a life-long hobby. Interests provide useful information for
guidance in educational and vocational areas. There are a number of psychological
instruments to assess or measure interests. The most well-known and highly
sophisticated instrument is Strong's Vocational Interest Bank for Men/Women
(SVIB). This instrument comes in two forms, one for men and the other for women.
However, SVIB requires a long time to administer and to score. The SVIB is a
landmark in interest-testing because it represents an important procedure of test
development It is an empirical or a posteriori test Developing such a test takes a
long time.
Another instrument used to assess interests is Kuder's Preference Record (KPR).
In contrast to SVIB, KPR is an a priori or rational test of interest The two tests
of interests are well known and should be used by trained persons.Tnterpretation
of the results has to be made on the basis of the appropriate norms provided in the
concerned manual. At the school-level a very simple tool called Thurstone's Interest
Schedule may be used. This has the advantage of being simple and easy to administer.
The interest areas assessed by this test are: Physical sciences, biological sciences,
artistic, literary, music, persuasive, social and so on.
The guidance counsellor, with the help of the information objectively obtained
from achievement, aptitude, personaliQ' and interest tests, can help the pupil acquire
a much better and deeper understanding of his own personality. The counsellor also
acquires a better understanding of the pupil and thus can guide him better with
regard to educational and vocational choices. In most counselling interviews, the
information obtained from psychological tests can be used in starting the guidance
int^iew. It breaks the ice and brings the counsellor and the counsellee closer.
Example of the use of Interest tests In guidance
Gopi was administered interest and other psychological tests. The data showed that
Gopi made C grades uniformly in subjects such as foreign language, history and
chemistry. The grades in physical education were higher. The cumulative record
revealed that Gopi was regular and was rated a good student. He had other interests
and belonged to several clubs. The counsellor obtained the following responses


--- PAGE 215 ---
Guidance and Counselling In the Educational Setting 195
concerning different areas: Medicine—'It is a wonderful opportunity to help people';
Dramatics—*1 love to act'; Writer—'I would like to write' etc. The family choices
were diffcrenL They wanted Gopi to become an engineer. The data obtained presented
a confftsing picture. Gopi's interests neither coincided with his scholastic peiformance
nor agree with the family's desires. It is obvious, therefore, that the counsellor
cannot solely be guided by any particular set of data.
/GUIDANCE AT THE ELEMENTARY-SCHOOL LEVEL
The elementary school for a majority of children is the first experience of attending
school and marks a very important stage in their Uves^For those who had preschool education like going either to nursery or kindergarten, going to an elementary
school may not be a big change. The elementary school has the basic responsibility
to develop the fundamental skills known as the three Rs in children. In addition,
the school has also the responsibility of encouraging the development of creadvity,
initiadve and leadership qualldes in children. It is during these crucial years that a
child's self-concept develops.
In going to school, the child is away from his home, parents and siblings. This
could be an unpleasant experience for the child and children usually react by crying
and showing unwillingness to go to school. The school has to take the responsibility
of making the children feel at home and not become anxious and withdrawn. The
other children in the school are strangers to the new entrant and it is up to the
teachers to integrate the newcomers into the group. They need some kind of
reassurance. Teaching of subject matter at this stage is not as important as promotion
of social and emotional maturi^ in children. Most schools and parents pay noattention to the social and emotional development of pupils. Parents are usually
anxious that their children should study well. But what is important to appreciate
is that learning can usually take care of itself provided the child is adjusted, feels
at home and secure in school. If the child has anxiety, insecurity, fear and other
feelings of stress affecting him, he will not be able to Icam. Forcing him to leam
under such circumstances will only develop negative anitudes and the child will
respond by becoming withdrawn from the learning situation. This results in producing
an effect opposed to the reasons for sending the child to schopl.
The teachers' role in this context is of a great significance. He has to know about
the child and give the necessary help in personal and social development. However,
with increasing enrolment of pupils and consequent increase in the size of the class,
it is becoming difficult for teachers to have sufficient knowledge of each child. As
a result, most children do not receive the attention that should normally be given
to them. This explains the need for provision of organized guidance at the elementary-
school level.
Early guidance of the child helps him adjust to new situations and develops the
ability to face problems and resolve them. This is in keeping with the basic philosophy
of guidance, namely, 'prevention is better than cure'. Children can be helped by
utilizing the resources of the school as well as the home and the community. Early
assistance towards adjustment can help the development of mental health of the


--- PAGE 216 ---
196 Counselling and Guidance
pupils. The preventive measures required to be taken depend on the resources
available. In order to provide guidance to the pupils one has to appreciate three
points:
1. The child is flexible in his early years and any problem(s) of the child has
(have) less time to become deep-rooted to resist modification.
2. The parents are keenly concerned about their young ones in school and their
cooperation and help can be easily obtained.
3. Many years of adjustment lie ahead of the child to grow and develop.
Going to school involves the important problem of 'readiness to learn'. This apart,
two other equally important factors of vital concern for the school arc social and
emotional maturity. Children's social and emotional development depend on home
environment and the attention family members give to the development of these.
The school has to continue the work started at home. Attitudes and behavioiu' such
as sulking, temper tantrums, aggressiveness, withdrawal, lying and so on need to
be checked and corrected at home and school. In addition, the school will have a
number of difficult situations to deal with. There are differences in the developmental
patterns of individual children. Some may have reached the normal level of
development, but a few may not have reacht^ this level. Giving all the children the
same exercises and tasks may lead to adjustment problems. A simple way in which
the school can deal with most problems is through play. Children should be
encouraged to overcome many of their emotional inhibitions through play. As far
as elementary school is concerned, the classroom may be used for organizing
different kinds of learning games. Teachers and parents need to recognize that no
amount of pushing can make the child do more than what his capacities permit.
Most parents, unfortunately, tend to believe that from the moment they send their
children to school, it is the responsibility of the school to take care of them. In
reality, parents should take as much interest in their children as they expect teachers
to take. However, this does not mean that they should overwork the child so much
that he begins to develop negative attitudes to learning.
Guidance in the elementary school can best be implemented if the developmental
sequence of the children is understood. To stale them simply, they are:
1. Children are both similar and different
2. Each individual child grows according to his own time schedule
3. Growth takes time, it can be encouraged but never forced
4. In the same individual child the growth may vary from time to time
When a child is slow, it may be his growth pattern and, therefore, he should not
be forced. According to Erickson, the danger in the early years lies in the possible
development of a sense of inadequacy and inferiori^ such that the child may
despair of his skills and of his status. This is an unfortunate situation and if allowed
to develop, the child may become a maladjusted under-achiever. It should be very
easy and simple for the teacher to establish a good rapport with young children.
Once rappOTt is established, the teacher wUI have no difficulty in trying to understand
and help each individual child in the group. But when the pupil is unable to relate
to the teacher, i.e., when no rapport is established between them, the teacher must
refer to a more competent pwson, like a school counsellor.


--- PAGE 217 ---
Guidance and Counselling In the Educadonal Setting 197
It is a common observation that children are happy and often ignorant about the
problems of adjustment They are usually enthusiastic and can become interested
in things easily, but their interests do not last long. Besides the home, the school
engages them for most part of their life. If the experiences at school are unpleasant,
it is unfortunate for the child. Guiding elementary-school children involves helping
them with their learning problems and making their experiences at school enjoyable
and engaging. The major aim of guidance at this level is the prevention of emotional
breakdowns. Children have problems of adjustment as they pass through a transitional
stage of being the centre of attention at home to being in a state of anonymity in
class. This sense of loss of importance may make them disappointed with school.
There could also be problems of learning if the curricular materials are not adjusted
to the child's abtlides. There could be problems involving other pupils and these
may lead to bullying by a few and sulking by others. It is increasingly recog^ed
that many emotional problems experienced by people later in life can be traced to
their years of childhood. Early id^tificadon and alleviadon, if not eliminadon, of
emodonal problems will go a long way in ensuring the healthy development of
children into useful citizens.
Guidance is an integral part of the total educadonal programme. To be eflecdve,
it must be a condnuous process from the child's first contact with school. Guidance
at the elementary-school level is based on the concept of continuous development,
emphasizing prevendon of problems and promodon of good mental hygiene. The
chief goal of guidance at this st^e is to help provide a warm and friendly school-setting in which the pupils' adjustment and learning are enhanced.
' <y GUIDANCE AT THE SECONDARY'SCHOOL LEVEL
The pupils enter the secondary school around lOf years of age. Their physical and
motor development is, by this time, generally complete. However, the other aspects,
namely social, emodonal, mental and moral, still need to develop. It is during these
years that the pupils enter the crucial period of adolescence. Besides, most of the
pupils are at the pre-puberQr stage and the physical development this period
is rapid and marked, this is known as the puberty spurtHiis is also a period ofemodonal britUeness. Adolescence brings in its wake a host of problems that need
to be met and resolved with understanding. Therefore, guidance of the pupil at this
stage is of great importance. There are adeast two other ftctors that need to be
ctHisidered:
1. At the secondary-school stage the pupils have to make academic choice that
ultimately detamines their vocatioiial future.
2. The pupil is becoming sexually mauire."
'  ^ Boys and girls twtd to become self-conscious and inquisitive about each others'
new dimensitms. They become restless, agitated and ^tracted. They ^eek more
frc^om and independence and tend to resent interference from adults.^ ..
*^6 high-school years coincide with early adolescence and post-puberty year^
There is a greater need to help young boys and girls deal with the problems of


--- PAGE 218 ---
198 Counselling and Guidance
growing up. They aiso tend to develop fads and fetishes, and if not suitably helped
to overcome tht'.m, can become emotionally crippled. Although there is a tremendous
all-round development, unfortunately only physical development is given attention.
Adolescents have their own ideas, interests and emotions and are keen to express
them and look forward to-recognition and encouragement The guidance counsellor's
relationship with high-school pupils must display warmth, understanding and
friendliness by which a bond of confidence and trust can be built between him and
the pupils. Thus it is possible to inculcate in them the desirable attitudes, interests
and goals. The guidance worker can help the pupil gain insight into his problems
and help resolve them, which if neglected could assume tremendous proportions.
Another important aspect is to help the pupil develop vocational consciousness,
occupational interests and related goals. Most societies hold up academic achievement
as an important goal. The guidance worker can help adolescents surmount serious
frustradons by trying to relate their abilides and interests to academic piusuits.
PrevenUve guidance in secondary school, at the pre-pubcrty stage, reduces the
need for remedial guidance later and improves the ability of pupils to make
independent choices with regard to occupadonal, social, civic and other activities.
Society imposes on the adolescent the responsibility of having to choose a
vocaUon to become a productive member of the society and prepare for marriage
and family life. The tasks necessitate making important decisions for the future.
Adolescence is the period of choice-making and guidance is the systematic effort
to help improve the quality of choices made. If guidance is to play a part in
increasing the individuals effectiveness, it must help them prepare themselves to
take appropriate decisions at this iime|
ATTmiDES AND INTERESTS
During adolescence, another dimension of important psychological change is the
development of attitudes and interests. As young individuals, most pupils exhibit
similar interests but during adolescence and later, there are changes in the mental
and social characteristics, leading to different attitudes toward parents, school,
teachers, peers and authorities. Interests change rapidly and sometimes are not easy
to understand. The conduct of young people is affected by all these changes that
we have referred to. It is the responsibility of the school to help the young grow
into disciplined, mature adults and exhibit a conduct that is approved by society at
large. But this does not happen in a large number of cases, pointing to the fact that
the guidance needs of students have either not been met or have been ignored
altogether. At the end of ihe secondary school, the youth have the option to pursue
academic careers or enter vocational schools or trade schools or start working as
relatively unskilled workers. At this stage, they have not acquired any skills or
proficiencies that can be traded. The socie^ needs employable hands but when the
young persons leave school without acquiring any specific skills, they have nothing
to offer and only join the ranks of the unemployed. Unemployment is a very serious
social problem and should not be left to be solved in an arbitrary fashion or on the
streets. The school should give sufficient thought to the problems that are likely to


--- PAGE 219 ---
Guidance and Counselling In the EducationalSetting 199
arise and help solve them in a meaningful way. Some of the aims of educational
guidance are to help the pupil;
1. Choose the curriculum which suits his/her abilities, interests and aspirations
or goals optimally.
2. Acquire efficient study habits and practices which would enable him/her to
achieve the desirable levels of academic success.
3. Develop social interests and talents outside the academic field since the
demands of life are myriad and confusing.
4. Understand the purpose of education and the iunction of school in relation
to his/her needs.
5. Develop his/her potentialities in areas of interest
6. Develop vocational interests and an urge to work in the chosen vocation.
7. Enjoy his/her life at school through happy and rewarding interpersonal
relationships with teachers and other pupils.
Educational guidance should be a condnuous process at school. Each pupil must
be helped to adjust to the world of academic work and its demands by developing
desirable cumcular interests and worthy life goals, culdvating efficient work habits,
developing sound study skills and practices, fostering desirable inteipersonal relations,
securing satisfactory mental health and acquiring a high sense of morale. Failure is
a serious concern of guidance. Teachers often refer pupils with unsadsfactory
academic grades to school counsellors. But other pupils can also be significantly
helped through guidance. Guidance is the most important means to help young
people develop into normal and healthy individuals who are emodonally mature
and who can make significant contribudon to their community.
At the high'school level, pupils have to be given vocadonal guidance in order
to choose appropriate occupadons. All educadonal guidance implies vocadonal
guidance. Occupadonal choices, like curricular choices, are often made at home by
parents or other elders. Young men and women are hardly ever allowed to exercise
their own will. The aim of educadonal guidance is to lead the individual pupil from
a state of dependence to a state of independent choice-making and action (Naya Mam
Paraiantryat Swatantryam). The chosen occupadon should be such that it suits
the abilides of the individual or else he/she will not be able to perform efficiently.
If it is above one's capacity, the performance will be poor and the individual may
be under severe pressure and tension. And if the occupadon is far below one's
capacity, it will lead to boredom, disgrunUement and dissadsfacdon. Again the
result would be poor performance. An occupation must not only suit one's ability
but must also be in tune with one's apdtudes and interests. Psychologists like
Maslow, Super and others stress that an individual must find opportunities for self-
actualization in one's occupadon, which should help develop his/her self-image.
Thus, at school, the pupil must be helped to make appropriate vocational choices.
Leisure-time activities also help develop appropriate attitudes and interests towards
suitable occupational avenues besides providing recreation and opportunities to
rejuvenate the mind. Every individual is a wholesome, unique personality and
satisfaction in life for him/her would be holistic.


--- PAGE 220 ---
zoo Counselling and Guidance
GUIDANCE TOWARDS LIFE GOALS
Life goal(s) is(are) not inherited. Goals in life have to be chosen and developed
with great concern. The choice is governed by several factors such as influence of
parents and home, teachers and school, community and so on. One's life-goals
develop slowly and unconsciously during the formative stages. Of course, the life-
goals may change, sometimes abruptly. Factors such as calamities and disasters like
famine, pestilence, war, earthquakes, etc. may change life-goals drastically. Guidance
towards life-goals is invaluable. The school should bear the primary responsibility
of developing a desirable philosophy of life in pupils.
Young pupils at school are growing and changing. Naturally their goals also
change correspondingly. If it were to remain static, it would not be in keeping with
the psychological nature of the growing pupil. A life-goal is not merely an end such
that the activity concerned can cease on achieving that end. For example,"eating
cannot be considered a goal though it is a biologically vital activity. A life, goal
is a value the individual strives to achieve or attain. For a pupil at school, passing
an examination is a valuable goal, but closer observation reveals that it is only a
short term means to an end. One cannot rest content with passing an examination.
One has to move forward. A life-goal suggests a striving towards something higher,
a value that permeates all the aspects of one's Ufe at a given time One's life-goalscan be defined through an understanding of one's self and of one's obligations and
responsibilities towards the society. Thus identified, life-goals serve to integrate thephysical, emotional, social and intellectual aspects of an individual's life
A life-goal being cenlra! to life, it is rather diffienit to make an appropriateKiectton. Both the chotce of hfe-goal and its attainment often rennire assistance
from others for the smipie reason that we live in a society and noVin isoiaUon. In
the ab^nce of proper guidance, puptls may easily become confused and fail prey
Sfs^rr^rrsiotL^HCTr^Tor^^^^^^ heequally important. The major life-goals fall into three broad categorie^!"concling:
1. Self-realization
2. Service
3. Satisfaction of one's needs.
All individuals need not necessarilv hav? aii .i,.,
importance of self-realization as a life-goal has been <«'iS ^ of goals. The
and civilizations. Self-concept as a life-goal acts ac n culturesactivities of the individual. guide and determines all the
We have illustrious examples of individnpio
Vivekananda, Pandita Ramabal, Fr. Damian who Loyola, Swami
others. Then again a large majority of individuals rlH?? life-goal and
life goal. Satisfaction is subjective, it is a state f • satisfaction as their major
or fulfilment in work. In this context, the ocei ^ results from successrelated to satisfaction as a life-goal. 'occuDatio^^i°"^^ ^ closelysatisfaction in life. However, satisfaction by itself ® sreat source of
choice of an occupation or any other actlvi»« i be a safe guide to theexample, an individual may


--- PAGE 221 ---
Guidance and ^unselllng In the EducadonaJ Settlr^ 201
derive satisfaction pursuing anti-social activities. This cedainly cannot be considered
a desirable life-goal.
Thus life goal occupy a central place in an individual's life. They provide the
necessary motivation, sense of direction and purpose to pursuits and highlight the
spiritual and aesthetic aspects of one's life.
B. EDUCATIONAL COUNSELLING
INTRODUCnON
Education is looked upon not only as a means of personal advancement but is also
valued as an asset of fundamental importance to society. Hence the expectations
from education are varied and many. Pupils expect to realize their aspirations and
find gainful employment Parents and teachers expect intellectual, moral and socialdevelopment of the young. Society expects to obtain an enlightened and law abiding
citizenry. The functions of education are closely related to the expectations of
pupils, parents, teachers, society and the state. Education is expected to develop the
personality of the individual and enhance his skills and abilities. By exposing
pupils to materials of a common cultural heritage and values, education unifies
pepples and societies.
From the earliest times, man has recognized the need for education. In the East
the great seers or rishis were unsuipassed in their learning and commanded enormous
respect. In the Vcdic hymns the teacher is extolled to the position of God or the
Supreme Being to whom the pupil has to completely surrender himself in thought,
word and action for imbibing the eternal truths. In the early Greek civilization we
had in Socrates the teacher par excellence. He adumbrated one of the basic functions
of education namely, thinking. Socrates questioned people and provoked them to
rhink The Sophists realized that people found it awkward to think. What was
Lded was peiauasion. oratory and rhetoric, ^ey found eager pupils flocking toSw gain mastery over these skills, pe Sophists, m charging fees for theirSce^ made education a tniely piofessiona activity.Whh tTever growing complexity of civilization ^d incre^mg pace of Ufeu  • in the youth of today to meet the challenges of life m the future;there is ne^ to ^ P jnjjjspensable part of life. Scholastic achievement has,for this education ^ one of the developmental tasks of adolescence
therefore, co*"® ^ L ^orid over, countries invest heavily to educate andand early adulthood. ^ challenges. But the teacher has come to be
equip their .Qday in the total development of the individual,
assigned a very smml rot damour for education and succeed in gaining
It is often foutid that siua ^^fonn far below the standards that might beadmission to institutions o ^ achieve even moderate grades. Why is it that
expected of them. A few academic efforts? This question is becomingstudents of known ability tan In the world. Binet (1905) was
more and more persistent almost
1' t


--- PAGE 222 ---
202 CounseJlIng and Guidance
commissioned by the French Education Ministry to examine the reasons for student
failure and suggest means for averting it In the USA this problem of student failure
has led to the appointment of Commissions, such as the Regent's Commission and
has provoked a vast number of research studies which have generally tended to
suggest that intelligence or scholastic ability are not, perhaps, the sure guarantors
of academic success. The recognition of non-intellectual factors in scholastic
performance has led to the need for providing assistance aimed at helping student
adjustment In the last decades of the past century many American colleges appointed
Deans of students whose function in the beginning was generally proctorial.
Managements also realized that disciplining was not enough and that there should
be a positive change in the attitude of the school or college authorities towards
students.
For the newcomer at school or college adjustment poses a host of problems.
There are several critical phases in the life history of the individual and one such
phase is adolescence, a period during which the pupil/student ^ves at school/
college. We shall briefly outline some of the problems that he/she has to face:
The first challenge comes from the body. The growth spurt in a brief span of
time changes the appearance and body-proportions. The young man/woman must
learn to accept his/her new body image and this could cause considerable
embarrassment. Closely related to the body growth, are the changes in body
sensations. Certain feelings not experienced earlier now arise and the individual
finds himself extremely sensitive to stimuli.
The other concomitant of growth is freedom. The individual now is grown up
and would like to exercise his freedom but it is hard to do so because he is unsure
of himself. The parents, till now, have, been models but in the changed situation,
that is in adolescence and post-adolescence, this does not give them a sense of self-
respect or self-confidence. It may even be a cause for self-depreciation. No wonder
the adolescent identifies himself with his peers. He may be confused in his self-
evaluation and his sense of values may not be reassuring. He finds his childhood
ccmscience to be unsuited to the changed circumstances.
Young people appear to labour under heavy odds. Therefore, their behaviour is
often impulsive. They have the resources but have no faith in themselves for taking
decisions. They may often be in a state of prolonged conflict. The school/college
setting creates additional problem situations, such as;
1. The student who complains about his inability to study.
2. The student who is nervous and is unable to speak in class.
3. The student who is aloof and cannot make friends.
4. The student who frequently resorts to neurotic irrelevant patterns of behaviour.
There could be several such problems. Owing to the fact that the student is
in a state of flux, he has no clear and definite purpose in life or a vocational
aim.
The student is perhaps away from his home and feels exposed in the new
environment. Most students exhibit vague and agitated reactions usually referred
to as anxiety reactions. Students* difficulties and problems can be vastly helped by
the sympathetic attitudes of teachers. The students would feel reassured if their


--- PAGE 223 ---
Guidance and ^unselllng In dje Edu^donal Setting 203
problems were recognized and accepted as legitimate. Most students, therefore,
want to find sympathetic listeners in their teachers. Often, not meeting with this
requirement, they are compelled to turn to their peers, who are no more experienced
or knowledgeable than they are themselves. Naturally they receive little or no help
and their problems may increase in intensity and this may be manifested in several
ways, the most frequent being their incapacity to study. It is, therefore, necessary
for smdents with marked emotional problems to be given the kind of assistance that
would assuage their conflicts. Failure to recognize this would result in students
suffering from problems of role deHnition and differentiation. Non-resolution of
these would develop feelings of insecurity which could become upseldng and
traumatic. In a situation like this he could resort to day-dreaming as a substitute for
effort which could lead to undesirable consequences.
Adolescence has yet another dimension which is very stressful and may lead the
young people to several problems. One serious problem concerns interest in sex
which could become more compelling and urgent in its quest for avenues of
expression and eventual gratification. This could become a very painful experience
if knowledge about sex is inadequate and sketchy. Such knowledge may lead to
behaviour which could be detrimental to their adjustment and well-being. Most
people tend to be unsympathetic towards this aspect of adolescents' stressful
expenence. It should be recognized that counselling young people during this stage
of their lives is as necessary as it is important
Educational counselling has emerged as a discipline to provide help to students
on cainpuses of schools, colleges and universities, such that they are not tormented
by their internal conflicts, do not become cynical and do not resort to self-destructive
strategies. Couiwelling has become increasingly accepted as a positive programme
in educational institutions. In recent dmes education has come to have a wider
meaning, namely, counselling, for it has increasingly been realized that learning in
the uldmate analysis is individual or self-learning. The external agencies—teachers,
bocdcs, libranes, etc.—can only help the individual learner to pursue and realize his
goal in accordance with his desires and wishes.
The school has an important pervasive counselling function. It is here that the
future citizen is encouraged to become a fiee and autonomous individual. Counselling
in school has the ultimate goal of making every individual pupU a responsible
individual. At school, children are given a curriculum, that is, they are provided
apinopriate learning experiences. The curriculum has nothing in it to help an
individual choose his line of action and thinking and be responsible for his actions
and choices. He has to realize his self through the ex^eise of his fieedom and
through his experience of a feeling of responsibility for his choices and actions.
Thus educational counselling is a philosophy, a function, a role and an activity.
As a philosophy, counselling, in the educational context, is a process by which
educational experiences are related to students' experiences. As a function,
counselling is a set of responsibilities that the institution should legitimately perform.
As a role, counselling should be viewed as the institution's responsibility to provide
services to the students. As an activity, counselling comprises a variety of functions
that different persons with counselling roles perform for students which are consistent
with the philosophy, the function and the role. Counsellors in an educational setting


--- PAGE 224 ---
204 Counselling and Guidance
rely upon psychological facts and principles to explain student problems of learning,
of remembering, of establishing healthy inter-personal relations, in brief, the problems
of adjustment. A student's function is to study and to obtain good results, otherwise,
he has faiied his role expectation. The school has the responsibility of determining
why this has happened, so that the counsellor can help the student reach his expected
level of performance.
Education is a diffused and often contradictory process. It may move towards or
away from its preconceived goals. For example, successful education should
encourage self-motivated inquiry which is obviously a valued educational goal. On
the other hand, a self-motivated and free enquiry may reject a rigid curriculum and
scheduling of classes. In this sense students may view the goal of education to be
dysfimctional.
The individual and the socie^ are mumally interacting elements comprising a
system. By changing the individuals we may change the society; and if we change
the society we would have changed the individuals. The goal of education is
concerned with these tremendous possibilities. Education, viewed in the context of
its counselling function, is concerned with the kind of activities, which if
implemented, would best accomplish the educational goal of harmonious individual
growth. The dynamics of change lie both within the individual and within the
society. Naturally we may proceed either way in planning and implementing the
desirable and/or remedial functions. Students who are under stress and strain, that
is, those who are experiencing adjustmental problems are not concerned with what
conceptual basis counsellors adopt for organizing the remedial strategies. The school
administrators are equally unconcerned with the conceptual or philosophical basis
of remedial strategies. They want results. Parents of pupils do not particularly differ
from the management or the students in this regard. But the counsellors, as
professional workers, cannot take a non-chalant attitude to the conceptual basis.
The counsellors consider whether a widening of the cognitive domain of students
would help solve their problems or whether deepening their affective concerns
would have a cathartic efrect or encourage them to act out their feelings and relieve
their pent-up feelings. The counsellors are primarily interested in improving the
general psychological processes through means of consistent educational counselling.
The purpose of education is to make p^sons competent Mere learning of the
prescribed course is not enough. It does not e^uip people to live efliciently and
h^pily. Most teachers are absorbed with teaching and are concerned only with
imparting intellectual skills and knowledge. Perhaps the more important concerns
of shaping and making pupils competent individuals remain neglected. Learning is
one thing, but knowing how to learn is another. Becoming sensitive to one's
environment and responding to it (the social and the non-social parts) in a manner
that would be self-satisfying is anodier aspect of learning. Counsellors are concerned
with the latter aspects of learning. Teachers are concerned with teaching and
counsellors with learning. This brings a very significant fact to the surface. Teaching
could be a group or mass activi^ while learning is almost entirely an individual and
personal matter. It is very essential that the self-defeating behaviour of several
students on our campuses should receive most careful attention. The self-defeating
behaviour resorted to by them often appears to be self-peipetuadng. The counsellor


--- PAGE 225 ---
Guidance and Counselling In the Educatlona] SetOns 205
is most immediately concerned with the self-defeating behaviour of students
on the campuses. His aim is to change it into productive and self-enhancing
behaviour.
iSELUNG THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL CHILD
It is d common observation that children are happy and often ignorant about the
problems of adjustment. They are usually enthuslasUc and can become interested
in things easily but their interests do not last long. Besides the home, the school
engages them for most part of their waking lives. If the school experiences are
unpleasant, it could be most unfortunate for the child.^ounselling elementary
school children involves helping them with their learning pr6blems'"^d making
their experiences at school enjoyable and engaging. The major aim of counselling
at this level is the prevention of emotional breakdowns. Children haVe problems of
adjustment as they j^s through a transiddnal stag^f being the centre of the scenein their homes to being in a state of anonymity in the classrooms. The warmth and
affective relations which are so vital at home are absent in the school and this sense
of loss of importance may make them feel disappointed with the schooli'There
could also be problems of learning if the curricular materials are not adjusted to
the child's abilides. There could be problems involving other pupils and these may
lead to bullying^by a few and sulking by a lot more of the children. It is increasingly
recognized that many emotional problems experienced by people later in life can
be traced to childhood years, fearly identification and alleviation, if not elimination,
of emotional problems will go a long way towards ensuring the healthy developmentof children into useful citizens. ■
AT HIGH SCHOOL
The high school years for children are co-terminous with their early adolescence
and post-puberty years. The need for helping young boys and girls deal with problems
ofgrowing up is great.. They tend to become emotionally highly strung, develc^
^ . and fetishes, and if not suitably helped to outlive them, may become emotionallycnppled. It is during this stage that there is a ttemendous all-round development inthem. Unfortunately ^e only obvious aspect, namely,' physical development, isgiven much atiention.\^e adolescents have their individualistic ideas, interests and
emotions and are kwn to express them and look fwvwiifl 't(rptbperrecpgnition and
eiicomag^ent The counsellof's.'role witH.ihe high school pupjls lies in showingwarmth, understanding' and firiendliness by wWch he*can win the confidence^d.
pupils and with the help of these, desiralile attitudeV. intei^ts and gojds
^^""^ulcatedr The counsellor c^ help the pupil gain insight into his problemselp i^olve'somerdf.the.pipblems whkh could assume tremendous.proj)ortiohsif neglected at this stage. Another important aspect is to help idre pupil devel^
vo^onaj. consciousness, occupational intaosts and related ~gpaI^Most*socleIieshold academic achievement to be an import^t goal for adolescents, "the counsellor


--- PAGE 226 ---
206 Counse/Ui}g and Culdcince
can help avoid serious frustrations by trying to relate abilides and interests to the
acad@ie~ptiisuitst>f-the-pupils::— ""
Some of the aims df^ucational guidance are to help the pupil:
1. Choose the curriculum which suits his/her abilities, interests and aspirations
or goals optimally.
2. Acquire efficient study habits and practices which would enable him/her to
achieve desirable levels of academic success.
3. Develop special interests and talents outside the academic field since the
demands of life could be myriad and confusing.
4. Understand the purpose of education and the functions of school in relation
to his/her needs.
5. Develop his/her potentialities in areas in which he/she is interested.
6. Develop vocational interests and an urge to work in the chosen vocation.
7. Enjoy his/her life at school through happy and rewarding inter-personal
relationships with teachers and other pupils.
Educational counselling is a continuous process. Each pupil must be helped to
adjust himself to the world of his academic work and its demands by developing
desirable curricular interests and worthy life goals, cultivating efficient work habits,
sound study skills and jracti^, fostering desirable inter-personal relations, securing
satisfactory mental health and acquiring a high sense of morale.
Pupil f^lure is a serious concern of counselling. Teachers ofteii refer pupils with
unsatisfactory academic grades to counsellors. But other pupils can also be
significantly helped. Counselling is the most important agency which can help
young people develop into normal and healthy individuals who are emotionally
mature and who can make significant contributions to their communities.
.At this level pupils have to be given vocational guidance to enable them to
prepare themselves to choose an appropriate occupation and to progress in it. All
educational guidance implies vocation^ guidance also.
COUNSELLING AT COLUGE
A total counselling programme at the collegiate level would comprise an extension
of the various services provided to the pupils at the earlier stages of their lives. The
collegiate student is for all practical purposes an adult with no adult responsibilities.
The objectives of higher education include the development of (1) a sound philosophy
of life, (2) an ability to enjoy life in many areas, (3) sensitivity to the different
aspects of the environment and (4) the capacity to be free-willed individuals, that
is, individuals who appreciate freedom.as being inescapable from responsibility.
Higher education aims to make them creative and constructive individuals.
Counselling service at the collegiate level is fairly comprehensive.
1. It is the culmination of the guidance the pupil receives at all the lower
school levels.
2. It emphasizes constructive self-guidance among students in meeting adult
responsibilities.


--- PAGE 227 ---
Guidance and Counselling In the EducaOomil Setting 207
3. It provides necessary assistance to overcome academic and social deficiencies
and thus helps to enrich their lives.
4. Another equally important activity is to develop healthy vocational and
professional interests among the students. Usually the students are encouraged
to visit the student counselling bureaux, as often as necessary, and feel free
to seek assistance. The kind of assistance provided is multi-dimensional—
health, residential, fmancial, social, recreational, vocational, academic and
placement assistance.
Counselling service for adults comprises a follow-up service which may help
counsellees secure contintiing education and assistance for personal and occupational
adjustments.
Counselling is thus a continuous and pervasive process of assisting people to
become more efficient, adjusted and happy. Counselling service comprises giving
information and help towards understanding oneself as well as others, such that
individuals are able to act freely, independently and be responsible for their own
choices and actions. Special counselling assistance could be provided in a variety
of fields like employment, education, social life, finance and personal adjustment.
Under each of the major areas listed above, counselling services may help provide
relevant assistance in (1) choosing a curriculum, learning and developing efficient
methods of study and seeking necessary remedial assistance in the field of educational
counselling and (2) pre-employment activities and job placement services in the
field of vocation^ counselling.
Motivation is the key to learning and it is in the matter of motivation perhaps
that counselling is in a better position than the other aspects of the school/college
programme to make an effective contribution. Motivation is a link between feeling
and thinking. Counselling aims at forging this link by helping to crystallize feelings
by giving them expression, direction and intellectual substance. If academic failure
is to be forestalled or academic standards improved, it is' imperative that counselling
assistance be provided and relevant values inculcated to stimulate the academic
and cultural aspirations of students (Rao, 1967).
The entire course and process of education is punctuated with significant
psychological issues. These have to be attended to if educational objectives are to
be realized . One of the first steps consists in the selection and admission of
students to educational institutions. What criteria have to be used in selecting them
for admission? It is a imiversally accepted fact that pupils differ from one another
with regard to abilities, interests, attitudes, aspirations and home and social
backgrounds. Questions such as, "Should the pupils know as much significant
material as is available regarding their curricula?" "What kind of activities are
required?" "Do the pupils have the necessary background training?" "Are
they really interested in the subject matter?" "What is its value to them?" are
relevant .
The choice of subjects is more fiequently made by the parents than by,the
children. Counsellors could discuss with parents questions such as those concerning
the choice of subjects for their children. '•
Another important area crucial to scholastic success is the stiidy skills and practice
of the pupils. Most student failures can be traced to faulty or inappropriate study


--- PAGE 228 ---
208 Counselling and Guidance
^Us. Improvement of these can help to a large extent in pupil progress. A related
area of vital importance is the area of interpersonal relations. A pupil who believes
that his teachers bear a grudge against him or that they are prejudiced against him
will And himself in an alienated and un-congenial atmosphere. A student will also
be greatly handicapped if he considers his fellow students unsympathetic and hostile.
Poor inter-personal relations may lead to his becoming withdrawn and pessimistic
and may sometimes lead to feelings pf inferiority. Another significant area concerns
the mental health of the learner. If a pupil is listless, worried, anxious, obsessed and
harassed by a host of problems—real or imaginary, his efforts to read are seriously
undermined. Educational guidance addresses itself to most of the above problems.
The area of educational .counselling is broadly divided into three sub-areas. The
Arst deals with the appraisal of the strengths and weaknesses of the learner through
administering objective tests and discussing these in the light of his choices, ambitions
and aspirations. This is aimed at providing a proper choice of curriculum and
leading to curricular adjustment The second concerns identifying the strengths and
weaknesses of the study skills and providing the necessary remedial services. The
third concerns resolving personal problems and improving inter-personal relations,
leading to better mental health.
The impact of education on each individual pupil at school and later in his life
depends upon several factors. The most important of these are usually identified as
the meaningfulness of educational programmes, the effectiveness of the instruction
and the motivation of the learners. Educational counselling as a service is expected
to support educational efforts to yield rich dividends in pupil adjustment and progress.
It is a process of helping leamers to understand themselves and the world around
them, to adjust themselves more efficiently and appropriately to other fellow beings.
Counselling, therefore, should be viewed as an integral part of the total school/
college programme. Some of the several functions of counselling are:
1. The appraisal service to assess objectively the potential of pupil—academic,
vocational, personality—by utilizing a variety of personal, psychological
and social data.
2. The information service to provide acctiraie, up-to-date, exhaustive and
reliable knowledge in educational, vocational and social fields so that students
are able to mate better choices and take wiser decisions.
3. The counselling service to help provide assistance towards self-understanding
and development through face-to-face and small group relationships.
4. The planning, placement and follow-up service designed to increase
vocatic^ development by facilitating students to choose and utilize
at^ropriate employment opportunities.
5. The evaluation service to provide feedback information for the benefit of
the school/college administration and the community at large.
The essential theme of counselling is the understanding of the personal experiences
of pupils in all their variety, depth and intensity in terms of the opportunities
available and the choices open to them. For this, it is necessary that die pupils
recognize their strengths and weaknesses and interpret them realistically. Counselling
is a disdnct product of the American educadonal system and it is universally


--- PAGE 229 ---
Guidance and Counselling In die Educadonal Setdng 209
accepted that in no other country has this movement developed to the extent it has
in the USA. The necessary conditions and proper atmosphere were present for the
rapid growth of the counselling movement The most important factors that influenced
its course were: (1) the U.S. Federal government support to the guidance movement
in a big way by providing precious funds and also by enacting the necessary
legislative measures to provide for guidance in the educational institutions, (2) the
psychometric movement which helped guidance personnel to be able to objectively
assess pupils' strengths and limitations and (3) the growing awareness among
educators and public-spirited men of the need to assist school pupils to make proper
educational and vocational choices. The principles basic to guidance are provided
by the work of Miller, Gribbons, Beck, Wrenn and Kehas. The general principles
of value for the practice of counselling in school are;
1. Counselling is concerned primarily and systemadcally with the person^
development of the pupils.
2. The approach and the technique to be adopted depend on the individual's
behaviour.
3. Counselling is oriented towards cooperation between the pupil and the
counsellor and is not a compulsive predetermined process.
4. The counsellor firmly recognizes individual worth and dignity and one's
right to choose and to make decisions.
5. Counselling, in its essence, is an educational process. It is, to be more
appropriate, an essential dimension of education.
6. Counselling in school should never be treated as an emergency reaction
pattern but as continuous, sequential and programmatic.
ihe^(5leOF TEACHERS IN COUNSELLING
In the school settings in India teachers are the primary guidance personnel. They
render non-professional assistance to pupils which may be of some help. In the
advaiKed countries, most school systems have accredited couitselling programmes
provided by the personnel on the staff of the schools. Most schools have school
psychologists to assist teachers in their work with pupils. The purpose of providing
counselling swvices, in the words of Rogers (1962), "is to enhance the pasonal
development and psychological growth toward a socialized maturity of its clients".
Arbuckle (1963) states the following functions of school counsellors in elementary
and secondary schools:
1. The counsellor helps emotionally disturbed children to arrive at h^pier and
satisfying solutions to their problems.
2. The counsellor helps children with their academic difficulties.
3. The counsellor is concerned with preventive and remedial measures. At the
elementary school level there is particular stress on the preventive and
developmental aspects so that there may be less need for remedial work
later on.
4. The counsellor cooperatively works with teachers to help them gain a greater
understanding of the pupils in their classes.


--- PAGE 230 ---
210 Giunselllng and Guidance
5. The counsellor helps parents obtain a better understanding and appreciation
of their children.
6. The counsellor uses appropriate test devices for diagnosis and counselling
purposes.
7. The counsellor maintains extensive and up-to-date records concerning pupils
for whom he is responsible.
8. The secondary school counsellor spends much of his time helping suidents
to make wise decisions regarding college courses or jobs.
9. The secondary school counsellor aids needy sUidcnts to obtain assistance.
10. All school counsellors work closely with other specialized personnel.
The nature of the responsibilities of the school counsellor suggests two major
roles—counselling and consulting.
The counselling ro/e—Th'e counsellor directly deals with students on matters
concerning emotional problems, self-understanding, decision-making, educational
and vocational planning, etc.
The consulting ro/e—The counsellor works with teachers, parents, educational
specialists and administrators on matters involving student understanding and student
management
The teachers' ro/e—Several writers, such as Roeber, Smith, Erickson, Humphreys,
Traxler and North believe that teachers should be expected to perform counselling
duties.Mathewson (1962) slates, 'Teachers engage in appraisal of pupil characteristics,
adjustment of behaviour, evaluation of individual performance, etc., and may even
undertake some individual counselling. To the extent that these functions are
performed professionally, teachers are participating in guidance practice".
But these can only comprise a set of restricted functions of teachers. Most
teachers put in considerable effort to cater to individual differences and to assist
pupils to participate in cooperative teacher-pupil planning.
In addition to the above, teachers are expect^ to help in the counselling services
through:
1. Studying and diagnosing children.
2. Identifying and referring pupils neediiig special assistance.
3. Preparing and maintaining guidance records.
4. Helping pupils develop effective study habits.
5. Contributing to pupils' educational and vocational planning and placement.
Wrenn (1962) has summarized the following principles from the personnel point
of view in education:
1. Guidance in education is given upon seeing the learner totally.
2. The philosophy of guidance axiomatically believes in the dignity and Integrity
of the student and his right to self-fulfilment.
3. Guidance should assist the student's plans for the future as well as enhance
the possibility of his living optimally in (he present.
4. Guidance is the prime advocate of individual differences in school. These
differences are to be recogiiized, taken advantage of and provided with
suitable conditions for their full expression.


--- PAGE 231 ---
Guidance and Counselling In the Educational SetOng 211
5. Guidance should take advantage of the variety of methods available and
choose the appropriate one for the pupil to deal with the task on hand.
6. The quality of the relationship established between the guidance worker and
the pupil and between the guidance worker and the teacher is of importance.
7. Guidance services must form part of the central stream of the educational
effort.
EDUCATIONAL COUNSELLING AND CURRICULUM
The school curriculum is a systematic organization of courses of study and activities
designed to further students* knowledge and competencies. Several types of cunicula
such as general, business and vocational, and industrial arts are offered at the
school level in the West In India curricular openings are relatively few with little
choice afforded to pupils. The curriculum is designed to help the individual pupil
achieve his potentialities and become capable of self-direction. Educational
counselling is aimed at enhancing the effectiveness with which the pupil profits
from the curriculum. Guidance is also used in the context of helping the pupil
acquire efficient learning skills and practices.
The systematic planning of curricular opportunities helps the pupil by providing
experiences which strengthen the feelings of adequacy and belongingness. The
curricular activities also provide exploratoiy avenues though which pupils develop
their interests and abilities. The curricular experiences contribute to the knowledge
necessary for educational and vocational planning. Educational counselling
contributes to curriculum development in a number of ways, one of which is to
make the goals of curricular activities congment with the needs of pupils. Another
way in which it helps is to enable testing, planning follow-up and other counselling
activities to contribute to curricular development, and yet another is to enable the
counsellors assist the individual pupil to understand and to choose difierent courses
to suit his requirements and develop social and vocational competencies needed for
successful living in a complex society. Educational counselling also assists
administration in a significant way. The educational .administrator is interest in
the effective functioning of the school/college and counselling helps in realizing
this goal in a mote effective manner. However, it should be borne in mind that
counselling is primarily concerned with the achievement of individual goals.
Several factors interfere with the effective programmes in schools and colleges.
The major areas of friction lie in the differences between the stated promises and
the i^actices adopted. The public in general, and administrators in particular, do not
understand the functions of counselling. The administrators naturally demand that
the guidance workers help them even when this may clash with the interests of the
individual students.
The counselling personnel expect the administrators to provide the necessary
facilities for the effective organization of counselling services and look forward to
sympathetic assistance from the administrators. They expect them to take a positive
interest in counselling programmes.
The administrators, on the other hand, expect the counselling personnel to serve


--- PAGE 232 ---
212 Cotmselllng and Cujdanee
the interests of administration. Often this causes much tension and friction between
the counsellors and administrators. The administrators expect counsellors to handle
the discipline of the institution and to minimize disciplinary problems. The
counsellors believe that such problems could be minimi^ through organizing
extra-curricular activities and encouraging student interests which would provide
suitable, avenues for their expression as well as their cultivation. The counsellors
believe, and rightly so, that a knowledge of students, an understanding of their
problems and the optimum use of educational and preventive measures could
significantly assist in countering indiscipline and thus help the insdtutional climate.
COUNSELLING AND HOME
The impact of the home environment on the individual pupil is of great significance
for school/college learning. The findings reported of Elmtown's youth are of great
interest for educationists as well as counsellors. The pupil/student benefits from
school/college if the school and home complement each other in educating and
socializing the pupil. Most learning problems arise from poor home conditions and
lack of understanding on the part of par^ts as well as teachers. Counsellors could
render yeoman service by helping parents and teachers understand their children
and pupils better. Counsellors could also help the pupils gain better understanding
of their own needs, aspirations and cravings and help them plan their educational
and vocational goals.
Educational counselling could also help harness community resources for the
development of youth through optimal referral services.
EVALUATION OF PROGRAMMES OF EDUCATIONAL COUNSUUNG
1. One of the important criteria of a good system is a desirable counsellor
student ratio. As counselling involves both Individual contact with most
pupils and long term contxt with some pupils in need of counselling
assistance, the counsellor-student ratio must be reasonable.
2. The counsellors should'be qualified for their positions. They should be
personally inclined and professionally prepared to be counsellors. A master's
degree in counselling is an essential qu^ification.
3. Necessary physical facilities should be available.
4. Adequate financial support should be provided.
5. The personnel should be self-evaluative and research oriented.
6. Counselling services should be available throughout the academic year and
throughout the pupils' academic lives.
7. Counselling services should provide for the appraisal of students and help
them to adjust, plan and develop.
8. Updated informational materials should be available and accessible.
9. Necessary records should be maintained which could be used to help pupils'
self-understanding and development.


--- PAGE 233 ---
Guidance and Counselling In the Educational Setting 213
Counselling services are based on client needs, for example, in an educational
setting the student needs to understand himself, know his personal characteristics,
understand environmental conditions, orient himself to present and future situations,
develop personal potentialities, etc. School/college counselling centres should provide
appraisal, planning, information and counselling services. The efficiency of the
services depends on the balance among corrective, preventive and developmental
functions.
Limitations Inherent In Evaluation
1. School counselling personnel do not have time for evaluation.
2. They are not trained to conduct evaluative studies.
3. Owing to the lack of belter techniques and tools, most of them depend upon
subjective approaches to determine the adequacy of their services.
4. The necessary data for evaluation is often not available.
5. The required funds for evaluation are not available.
6. The administration is not very keen about evaluation.
7. Hie necessary cooperation from the teaching personnel, administration and
parents is often difficult to enlist.
SUMMARY
Counselling In the educational context comprises a very Important and vital part
of educational activities. Many students at dlRerent levels of education have
been found to function at levels far below their capacities. Counselling assistance
would certainly help to brighten the lives of many young people.
Counselling Is Indeed an Important dlinenslon of education. It promotes
emotional maturity, personality development, self-responslblllty, creativity and
eiblllty to solve problems. In the complex contemporary world, counselling Is
rapldb' becoming an Important part of the educational structure. The administration
has to take a positive attitude towards counselling and pixwlde the required
facilities to the counsellors to function optimally.
Home and community resources should be nreanlngfully harnessed for the
counselUng needs of pupils/students. The main brunt of covinselllng responsibilities
win fall on the teachers, at least In the schools. They need the necessary training
for acquiring the necessary skills. They have to cultivate a healdiy attitude
towards counselUng. Counselling programmes need to be evaluated horn time
to time. The specialist skills for rriaklng objective evaluations are generally not
available with the teachers or even with some trained counsellors. However, tire
Importance and need for evaluation cannot be underestimated.


--- PAGE 234 ---
214 Counselling and Guidance
C. VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE
INTRODUCTION
Qrtie recognition of the fact that education should equip the individual to enter anoccupation and be able to make a living, makes vocational counselling an integral
part of the educational process. Thus counselling in the educational setting cannot
be comprehensively and purposefully rendered without including counselling towards
vocational development Therefore, educational and vocational counselling are
topther provided to both school and college-going students.^(We may recall that the counselling movement had its origin in the vocational
guidance movement Thus it was the forerunner of counselling psychology. A few
years before the end of the last century, Jessie B. Davis (1898) started this movementj)
He set up an Educational Career Counselling Centre in Detroit in 1898. Within a
decade after'this pionieering venture, Eli Weaver (1907) published his book Choosing
a Career in 1908 and Frank Parsons started the Vocatioij^^ureau of-Boston.
Later, his book Choosing a Vocation was published. The^eftect the early interestof educators and social workers in the vocational development of youth.^C^The choice of a career is undeniably one of the most crucial decisions one makes
in iife.jThe irony is that such an important decision is often made quite early in the
life of an individual and is sometimes made without giving as much thought to it
as is often given to such things as buying a necktie or a pair of shoes, ^he choice
of work determines how an individual's time is going to be spent, what type of
people he will associate with, what kind of place he will have to work and liv6 in
and a host of such very important things. Naturally a career should be chosen with
utmost care, thought and planning. Often in the matter of vocational choice, an
individual may find himself unequal to the task, or in a dilemma to choose one or
the other, or be totally in the dark. All such individuals require assistance called
vocational counselling. If vocational counselling were made an integral part of the
total educational process, it would be most meaningful, helpful and useful to the
individual. It will be helpful if the counsellor is knowledgeable and has the necessary
information concerning how individuals develop vocationally. Such information, if
available to the counsellor in the process of counselling, mak^ the choosing of a
career easier and simpler.
THEORIES OF VOCATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Each counsellor has a set of assumptions that guide his actions in the pursuit of his
role as a vocational counsellor. The set of assumptions which guide his actions
comprise his 'theory' of vocational development. Several theories of vocational
development exist and a systematic attempt to classify them on the basis of their
similarities or otherwise is useful.
Herr and Cramer (1972) have suggested a working classification of vocational
development theories:


--- PAGE 235 ---
Culdance and CounseiUng In the Educadonal Setting 215
The trait-and-factor or actuarial theory emphasizes the individual's innate abilities
and acquired interests and their relation to the demands of the different wori:
situations.
Starting with the tradition of Parsons, Paterson, Darley and Williamson (1920)
developed the trait-and-&ctor approach at Minnesota. The underlying thesis of this
approach is very simple. According to it, individuals have different innate capacities,
abilities and aptitudes for different kinds of work. In vocational guidance, the
purpose is to match the individual and the occupation optimally for mutual benefit
This view is based on the psychometric tradition. There are a number of issues that
this theory fails to explain. For instance, two individuals with different abili^
patterns may enter upon a single occupation but may progress differently and may
have different levels of job satisfaction. Further, this theory takes the static and
somewhat rigid point of view that individuals fit into specific jobs and would be
like fish out of water if they found themselves in different kinds of jobs. This was
based on the commonsense approach of 'putting square pegs in square holes', that
is, fitting individuals into appropriate jobs. It is increasingly being realized from the
experiences of several people that an individual, on taking up a job which is not
to his liking and yet is helpless to get out of it. would in the course of time adjust
himself and not remain frustrated for the rest of his life. This suggests that a square
peg in a round hole will not remain square all the time. Its angularities will get
rounded. Further, there are several thousands of occupations. The Ministry of Labour,
US Government, for example, has listed not less than 40,000 occupational titles in
its prestigeous publication Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT}. In India also,
the Ministry of Labour in the National Classification of the Occupations (NCO) lists
over 10,000 jobs. The number of occupations can never remain static. New
occupations are ever on the increase. Some occupations are becoming obsolescent
and are disappearing. Therefore, fitting individuals into jobs (yet to evolve or likely
to disappear) is becoming increasingly difficult
The decision theory holds that individuals consider various alternatives and decide
on the one which promises satisfaction. This does not, however, mean that the
altonatives are rationally or dispassionately considered.
The sociological theory emphasizes sociological factors which influence individual
development and vocational choice. For example, one's social status, social group,
conventions, etc., exert an influence on one's vocational choice. A young man
hailing from the upper class of society would not like to choose an occupation
associated with the lower class of society.
The psychological theory holds that vocational choice is affected by the
individual's personality structure, his early experiences, motivations and needs.
"Uie developmental theory emphasizes that vocational choice is not a static
decision, but that it is a process subject to continuous pressures for modification
and adaptation. Most vocational choice theories stress developmental factors in the
individual's life experience. Environmental factors affect young people by providing
or denying them opportunities for their growth. The individual has some amount of
freedom' of choice. Super, Ginzberg, 'fiedeman and others subscribe to this point
of view. Others, like Flanagan, Crites, Gribbons, Lohnes.'Samler and Beilin, also
hold developmental points of view. Anne Roe, Holland,-Hoppock and others stress


--- PAGE 236 ---
216 Counselling and Guidance
psychological needs to be of paramount importance in determining choice.
Psychoanalytically oriented thinkers like Bordin, Nachmann and Segal explain
vocational development in terms of personality dynamics. Miller and Form,
HolUngshead, Blau and others emphasize sociological factors, such as the influence
of the home, school, community, etc., in vocational choice. (Tolbert, 1974).
The decision theory has profoundly influenced vocational development theories.
Decision-making stresses that the need for information, self-knowledge, and
perception of rewards and deterrents is of prime importance in making decisions.
Gelatt, Hilton, Hershenson and Roth contribute to this view.
There is yet another point of view which may be identified as the existential
view. Simon and Standley have stressed fulfilling potentialities and experiencing
responsibility as major factors in relating vocational choice to 'becoming'.
It is neither practicable to consider the several theories in any detail nor is it our
piupose to do so. What is sought is to present an overview to help.appreciate the
need for vocational counselling at different life stages of the individual.
Super's approach is often labelled as "...differential—development^—social—
phenomenological psychology". He stresses four aspects, namely, vocational life
stages, vocational maturity, translating the self-concept into vocational self-concept
and career patterns. The vocational development of the individual is an aspect of
the total development which is affected by one's psychological and physiological
attributes as influenced by environmental conditions. Super (1953) formulates ten
propositions which comprise his theory of vocational development The propositions
in brief are:
1. Individuals differ with regard to their abilities, interests and personality
attributes.
2. They are capable of entering a number of occupations by virtue of their
abilities, interests, etc.
3. Different occupations require different pauems of abilities, interests and
traits.
4. The preferences of people for different vocations change with their self-
concepts which are modified with time and experience. This makes choice
and adjustment a continuous process.
5. This process of adjustment involves a series of life stages which are identified
as growth, exploration, establishment, maintenance and decline. In each of
these stages there can be periods corresponding to fantasy, tentative and
realistic aspects and the trial and stable phases which make up the establish
ment change.
6. The career pattem of the individual is determined by^veral factors, important
among which are parents, socio-economic conditions, intelligence, personality
and available opportunities.
7. Vocational development can be guided by assisting the maturation of abilities
and interests and providing for rwlity testing.
8. Vocational development essentially consists in implementing a self-concept
which develops as a result of the interaction between the subjective factors
and the environmental conditions.


--- PAGE 237 ---
Guidance and Counselling In die Educadonal Setting 217
9. The process of compromise involves role playing either in imaginary
situations or in real life situations.
10. Satisfaction fiom work is dependent on the extent to which the individual
is able to find expression for his abilities, interests, personality traits and
values. Work satisfaction also depends on the work situation.^
Super's theory helps in understanding the developmental concerns of young
people.
Ginzberg's theory of occupadonal choice is also a developmental theory, according
to which individuals move through a series of stages and the process of occupational
choice is influenced by the individual's attributes, educational background and
situadonal constraints. The movement of the individual through the various stages
is irreversible. An option once made caimot be undone. Ginzberg identified the
fantasy, the tentadve, the transidonal and the realisdc stages in the process. Ginzberg
later modified his theory in certain aspects (1970,1972). Irreversibility, which was
an important concept, was downgraded. This was owing to the recognidon of the
fact that the process of vocadonal choice extends over a much longer period of
time. Ginzberg subsdtutes 'opdmizadon' for compromise as a strategy in occupadonal
choice. The constraints are given a more important place and considerable weight
is attached to them in the revised theory. The opportunity, structure and value
orientadon were also given more emphasis.
Tiedeman and O'Hara's career development theory defines the process as building
a vocadonal identity through differentiation and integration. The theory identifies
foiu* steps: (1) the anticipation phase, involving the exploration of goals, past
experiences, abilities etc., (2) the crystallization phase which concerns values, goals,
etc., (3) the opting for a particular choice which follows crystallization of goals and
values, and (4) clarification which concludes the differentiation phase of decision-
making.
The individual enters the second phase of implementation and adjustment.
He puts his plans into effecL The three sub-steps included in this process are
(1) induction, that is, entry into the situation, (2) reformation as a result of the
individual's experience of the situation in which he enters (reformation consists of
responding to and adjusting to the environmental changes) and (3) integration,
which is a balance between the individual's needs and the demands of the situation.
Anne Roe's theory of career development is very closely related to Maslow's
personalia theory, llie theory is stated in a set of propositions:
1. Genetic inheritance is important It sets limits to potential development
2. The development of inherited characteristics are affected by unique
experiences, cultural background and socio-economic factors.
3. The pattern of development of interests, attitudes and personality is
detranined by the individual's experience. The direction of development is
detCTmined by early satisfactions and frustrations. The mode and degree of
the satisfaction of individual needs determine which of the needs become
D.E. Super, "A theory of Vocational Development", American Psychologist, 1953, 8,
pp. 189-190.


--- PAGE 238 ---
218 Counselling and Guidance
the strongest motivating factors and which do not. The pattern of psychic
energies is the major determinant of interests. The intensity of the needs and
their satisfaction determine the de^ee of motivation.
Holland identifies six occupational environments—realistic, intellectual, social,
conventional, enterprising and artistic. Each environment involves levels similar to
Roe's. Hoppock's theory is known as the composite theory which vocational
counsellors are greatly concerned with. Hoppock explains that a specific occupation
is,chosen on the basis of the belief that it will best meet one's needs. Needs may
be vaguely felt or clearly understood, in eithCT case, they influence choices.
Vocational development starts with the awareness that an occupation can meet
one's needs. It progresses till one's needs are fulfilled. Knowledge about oneself
affects occupational choices. Information ^ut occupations also helps in the choice
of occupations.
The psychoanalytical theory of vocational development emphasizes the following:
1. There is a continui^ of human development from infancy to the adult years.
2. Instinctual Oibidinous) sources of ^tification are the same for all—adults
or childr^.
3. An individual's pattern of needs is determined in the first six years. The
needs may be modified only to a slight extent.
4. The occupation one seeks to enter is determined by the needs developed in
the first six years.
5. The theory applies to all ages and all levels and all types of work. However,
it does not apply to those who are restricted or motivated by external factors
and to those who can find no satisfaction in work.
6. Work represents the sublimation of infantile impulses into socially accepted
channels. Lack of knowledge concerning occupations may result in the
choice of wrong occupations, that is, one which does not fulfil one's
expectations.
7. All jobs are described in terms of psychoanalytical needs.
Sociological theories stress economic and sociological factors in job choice. All
theories stress the importance of natural ^dowment, physical conditions and social
strucUire in determining personalia development through education, socialization,
etc., and also influencing social mobility, shifts in industrial requirements, etc.
These together constitute the socio-psychological and socio-economic factors.
The socio-psychological factors govern the immediate determinants ofjob choice
based on occupational information, occupational demands, etc. The socio-economic
organization determines the available opportunities in the world of work. The
subjective personality factors, socio-psychological attitudes, prejudices, status, etc.,
and one's own occupational and technical qualifications determine vocational
preference. Further, the socio-economic factors affect the standards of selection
practices. A harmonious relation between them results in occupational entry.
All decision-making theories stress the importance of decision-making in
vocational choice and development. Past experiences are also important for decision-
making.
A step-wise process of decision-making is given below.


--- PAGE 239 ---
Guidance and Counselling In the EducadonaJ Setting 219
Purpose or objective; data collection; possible alternatives; likely outcomes;
desirability of outcomes; evaluation of a decision leading to either terminal decision,
the outcome of which has to be checked against the purpose or objective or
investigatory decision which has to be checked against the data and does not lead
to any outcome. In this system, value and utility play important roles. ThK'e is
naturally an element of risk in decision making.
Hilton's theory stresses that the recognition of dissonance leads to decision-
making. The individual thinks that an occupation has more unattractive than attractive
features and since the dissonance level is high, he is convinced that the decision to
choose to enter it will not be satisfactory. He feels the need to reduce the level of
dissonance in his life. A consideration of some of the representative theories leads
to certain common, universally accepted principles which are:
1. Uniqueness of the individual and his traits, interests and abilities.
2. Interaction of the individual with the situation which determines his
developmenL
3. Career development begins early and continues throughout the life of the
individual.
4. Career development involves growth and synthesis of the self and
environment.
There are stages in career development which largely reflect psychological,
physiological, sociological and economic factors.
Career development involves the making of increasingly responsible choices.
The choice of a career is based on (1) subjective factors, namely, values, (2)
occupational opportunities, (3) the degree of expectadon the individu^ has of being
accepted and (4) the expectadon of sadsfacdon.
The dirccdon and level of career choice are guided by familial and cultural
factors.
Career maturity is revealed through an organized set of behaviour and atdtudes
that help meet the demands of the situadon successfully. It involves making one's
own choices and one's willingness to take responsibility for them.
SUMMARY
A number of theories of vocatlortal development have been proposed. Each
theory stresses one point of view and thus does not explain the complex
process In Its totally. For the vocational counsellor the various theories of
vocational development provide useful points of departure. Since his clients
come from different cultural backgrounds and hold dIRierent views no single
theory can satlsfoctorlly explain the complex process of vocational choice.
THE PROCESS OF VOCATIONAL COUNSELUNG
Vocational counselling is a process which can be found in operation in diffident
settings and under different conditions of work. The main thrust of vocational


--- PAGE 240 ---
220 Counselling and Guidance
counselling is on vocational planning. Vocational planning detennines cumcular
choices and provides the necessary motivation for scholastic achievement Therefore,
vocational counselling in its true sense operates alongside educational counselling.
They play mutually complementary roles. However, vocational counselling may be
offered in situations outside the school and college, as the process aims at providing
vocational orientation. The situation is essentially a learning situation and is best
found to function in a non-authoritarian setting. More often than not. the process
of vocational counselling is oriented to the future such that the counsellce is able
to plan and implement new techniques for meeting future problems. In vocational
counselling ^ere is need to reduce the anxiety of the counsellee regarding his
vocational problems but psychopathology is not involved. The vocational counsellor
aims at enabling the counsellee to adopt more positive attitudes and become more
realistic in the estimation of his assets and liabilities. Psychotherapy has some
relation to vocational counselling but psychotherapy is seldom achieved through
vocational counselling.
Before the vocational counsellor proceeds with the process of helping the
counsellee there is need to establish rapport through accepting and understanding
each other's role and objectives. The counsellor would require an objective appraisal
of the counsellee's abilities, aptitudes, interests, likes and aspirations. He may use
the objective data along with the information obtained in the interview sessions to
help the counsellee understand his vocational goals. It could become necessary to
make the counsellee realize the inappropriateness of his vocational goals but this
does not necessarily mean that the counsellor would discourage the counsellee from
persisting in his vocational plans. The vocational counselling process essentially
involves flexibility and change. If the counsellor is able to help the counsellee
appraise his own abilities in an objective manner, the latter himself would change
his vocational plans. This is what is meant by flexibility. On the other hand, if the
counsellee were to doggedly persist with his myopic plans it would only reflect his
irrationality. One of the important articles of faith of all counsellors is their belief
in the rationality of individuals and their capacity to make intelligent choices and
meaningful decisions.
The non-authoritarian nature of the counselling situation provides for a free
atmosphere in which counselling can function effecdvely. After all, the job of the
counsellor is not to make a choice and impose it on the counsellee. Often counsellees
make wrong choices owing to false self-perceptions and inadequate appraisal of
their own abilities. It is one of the functions of the counsellor to help the counsellee
gmn insight into himself.
The other important fimction of a vocational counsellor is to provide complete
career information. It is only after considering the occupational infoimation that the
counsellee can make vocational plans. Shartle (1951) holds, "the role of vocational
information as a part of counselling pitx^s is an important one...the counsellor's
appraisal of the individual who is making a vocation^ choice must be in terms of
the vocational alternatives".
The counsellor must facilitate optimal confrontation with minimal anxiety when
approached by a client who is at a transition point in his vocational career.


--- PAGE 241 ---
Guidance and Counselling In the EducatJonal Setting ZZl
EXPLORATION AND CONTRACT SETTING
It is necessary for the vocational counsellor to proceed with great care as he has
to tread a fine line between two major limitations. The first limitation is that the
client may have a very restricted set regarding what is relevant to his choice. The
other limitation arises from the counsellor's efforts to counteract this restricted set
by appropriately offering therapeutic help.
The personal issues involved in the choice of a vocation raise questions about
a person's capabilities. An individual's thoughts and feelings are related to his
reactions and observations of himself. He imagines himself in an occupation by
eliciting such reactions which serve to establish his needs and desires and his
anxieties about fulfilling them. The counsellor must keep in mind the developmentally
based conflicts that might be provoked by the choice of a particular vocation.
THE STATE OF CRITICAL DECISION
The examination of an individual who is desperate about choosing an occupation
will reveal an internal struggle for growth and change. The counsellor must be
cautious in making explicit statements regarding his choice.
Counselling for limited goals is conducted by keeping the realistic problems in
focus and directing attention to a strategically select conflict. The ideas that are
relevant to vocational identity have to be kept as a central theme in working
towards change. If the client opts for change, the counsellor has to decide whether
he is competent enough to perform his role in the change process.
The developmental model establishes a close link between personality develop
ment and career development which provides a basis for eliminating the dichotomy
between vocational and personal counselling without substituting one for the other.
The simplest of the theories was propounded by Ginzberg in 1951 at Columbia
University. According to him there are four major stages in the vocational
development of an individual. In the early years of childhood there is the stage of
'no choice*. A little later the child is able to say what occupation he would like to
pursue. And every time he is asked he gives a new answer. There is no definiteness
in his choice (Rao, 1968). This state is called the fantasy stage. Next, the child
enters the 'trial and error' stage and finally the stage is one of stabilization. Thus
we have in terms of the psychological processes, a definite explanation afforded for
the choice of an occupation. Persons do not enter occupations accidentally or
impulsively. Occupational choice usually has a long history in the life history of an
individual. In Ginzberg's (1951) theory, during the period of *no choice* which
ccffresponds to the 'period of latency', the child is largely preoccupied with his own
body and his immediate environment When he grows up to the pre-puberty stage,
he 1^ certain interests which widen as he enters the post-puberty stage. Depending
upon the strength of each interest that is operative at a given moment, he may
choose the vocation that is supposed to satisfy his interest This is the fantasy
stage. He soon grows up to outlive this stage. Next is the tentative stage in which
he considers his capabilities with a certain amount of realism. There are other


--- PAGE 242 ---
^99 Counselling and Guidance
sub-periods in this stage, namely, the value stage, that is. he tries to think of
entering an occupation that is valued high by his community such that he would be
recognized by his society. Next comes the transition stage which roughly corresponds
with the terminal stage of his school education. The transition from school to
college marks a big break with the past. It is a great leap into the future. Most of
his earlier ideas appear unrealistic and now the young man tries to choose the kind
of occupation that would meet most of his demands. This is the realistic stage and
proceeds from the state of exploration through crystallization to specification. The
last is the stage of stabilization. The advantages of Ginzberg's theory are its simplicity
and commonsense. However, there are a number of limitations or questions which
this theory does not answer. The foremost among them is the total neglect of the
importance of the environment A person's entry into an occupation is not entirely
a matter of individual choice (Rao, 1970). This is best epitomized by the
Shakespearian dictum, "if wishes were horses beggers would ride".
Steffle's (1966) theory of vocational development includes the following:
1. An occupation permits the expression of an individual's personality.
2. The individual's choice of a particular occupation represents the mask he
would like to wear in society.
3. An occupational role usually represents an approach-reaction and
simultaneously an avoidance-reaction, that is, it appears attractive and hence
tempting enough to be chosen. At the same time it also suggests the less
apparent and possible hazards leading to avoidance-reaction.
4. Society exerts certain limiting forces which determine the occupational
po^nality of any individual.
In sum:
1. The factors which lead an individual to choose an occupation are influenced
by his age, sex, social class, etc.
2. For some individuals occupational choice may be crucial and ego-involving
and for others it may be peripheral to their personal identity.
DISHNCTION BETWEEN VOCATIONAL COUNSELLING AND VOCAHONAL
GUIDANCE
Vocational counselling is often mistaken for vocational guidance which largely
consists of providing career or occupational information to pupils. With the ever
growing complexity of modem living, different kinds of ofxupations are emerging.
Most young men and women are handicappied by inadequate information about the
opportunities available to them, the requirements which they have to fulfil to enter
those occupations, and the places (locations) where specidized training facilities
are available. Young men and women should know all about the opportunities open
to them so that they can make the best use of them. Educational institutions as well
as governmental agencies are realizing the importance of dissemination of career
information. Most people fail to realize their potentialities largely owing to their
ignorance concerning how to put their potential to use. Vocational guidance thus


--- PAGE 243 ---
Guidance and Counselling In the Educational Setting 223
largely concerns itself with providing occupational information. To do this
successfully the bureau has to collect, classify and disseminate occupational
information by employing several media of communication, such as bulletin boards,
career pamphlets, film strips and films, individual interviews and group discussions.
In addition to giving information the guidance worker may occasionally be called
upon to perform a wider function of clarifying the seveik questions concerning
occupations.
Vocadonal counselling is closely related to the above functions. It is carried out
at the same location and often by the same person(s). Therefore, the distinction
between vocational counselling and vocational guidance is blurred. Sometimes no
distinction is made or recognized. However, this distinction is dealt with here.
Vocational counselling does not consist in giving vocational information. It is
basically more concerned with the vocational development of an individual, that is,
it is concerned with his personality growth. Vocational counselling has for its locus
the client or'the individual. It is concerned with the discovery of his potentialities,
interests and aUitudes such that he is helped to 'actualize' himself in the pursuit of
his occupation. The occupation is thus the means of self-realization or self-discovery.
Vocational counselling employs several techniques of client appraisal and assessment
and through the counselling process or the counselling interview(s) the client is
helped to discover for himself the ways to fulfil his urge for self-actualization.
SUMMARY
Earlier, counselling of vocational choice centered on extrinsic mottvatlons for
work and vocation. Later It was realized that vocational counselling called for a
more Informed approach to acquaint the adolescent with the kind of work he
could profitably choose, Several monographs and pamphlets describing various
groups of occupations are available to help the youth. However, they only
provide basic Information about the occupatlorrs.
The next stage In the theory of vocational choice centered on a mbced,
extrlnslc-lntrlnslc motivation model. It called for matching the p^chologlcal
characteristics of the occupation with the tested characteristics of the adolescent.
To ensure satisfaction, characteristics or qualities Intrinsic to the occupation,
vocational Interests and personality aspects were considered necessary to be
assessed by testing. The counsellor was responsible for Interpreting his client's
test results In such a way as to make dear to the client which occupation would
fulfil the requirements to maximize his chances of success.
More emphasis was laid on personality theory and personally dyrramlcs In
the late thirties. The client was given vocational courrselllng by either the same
person or another person and either In the same agency or In a dlHerent one.
The process often reverted to the earlier model when the dient expressed his
desire to deal with the problem of choice and refused to reveal the neurotic
basis for his dlfflcuiy. This phase Is called the dual model, the extrlnslc-lntrlnslc
choice model or the Inner dynamic of symptom model.
The developmental conception of vocational choice has been emerging for
more than a couple of decades. Super (1953) points out that an Individual's
vocational career consists of a whole series of choices, first at,educaUrmal translHoft


--- PAGE 244 ---
224 Counselling and Guidance
points and later at occupational ones. Holland (1959) has prepared a set of
types Into which all occupations and persons can be fitted. The p^choana^c
theory asserts that die developmental approach to vocation should consider the
Influences shaping personally from birth. The developmental model Is a form of
vocational counselling which views vocational development as a self-confrontation
which an Individual Is able to experience at various phases In his life cycle.


--- PAGE 245 ---
11
i m
INTRODUCTION
Humanism is the predominant element in counselling. The movement had its origin
in the concern to ameliorate human suffering. Counselling has rightly focussed on
the individual and the problems conceming the individual. However, individuals do
not exist by themselves—they are members of a family, they are employed in an
organization and so on. Some of the problems of the individuals have reference to
the social situation in which they find themselves. With the ever increasing
complexity of life there is need to adjust and adapt oneself to the changing needs
of society. Developmental problems could also arise from natural growth processes
necessitating appropriate adaptations to changing needs and responsibilities.
Our concern thus far was essentially with the individual and counselling was
considered a face-to-face, one-to-one helping relationship. TTiis relationship could
be utilized for a variety of situations, in addition to the ones we have considered
in the educational context. In the present chapter we shall discuss some of the
special areas in which the counsellor may be called upon to function.
One such special area may concern family group consultation. This essentially
is an extension of the group counselling technique. A few families are brought
together for a possile resolution of their problems. Another interesting area concerns
counselling with families regarding their children. A related area is counselling
with parents. This has a twin goal. On the one hand, the counsellor tries to help the
parents and on the other, the children through counselling the parents. This is to
help provide the parents with a better insight into their children's activities and
problems.
With an increase in social strife, tensions and unrest, there is an increasing
incidence of juvenile delinquency. Counselling the delinquent is one of the most
promising ways to help save youth firom resorting to delinquent behaviour. More
often than not, the delinquent is a reluctant client. There are also other clients who
are reluctant for various reasons and whom counselling can help.
Marriage is an important milestone in the individual's life. To a very large
extent, it makes for the individual's happiness. Marriage counselling deserves more
attention than it is getting at present. I^-marital counselling also could be a very
useful service to young men and women. The section on pre-marital counselling
briefly outlines the various issues involved.
In recent times, with our growing concern for social justice and fair play, we are
becoming increasingly aware of the various disadvantaged groups. The foremost


--- PAGE 246 ---
Z26 Counsdllng and Guidance
among them are undoubtedly women. In a society dominated by males, women
have been subjected to some amount of discrimination. It is essential that women
are enabled to become more self-reliant and self-dependent. In this context
counselling is assuming more importance.
There are several areas calling for specialized counselling services and we do
not intend to discuss all of them. The basic concern of this chapter is to introduce
the reader only to some of the special areas.
FAMILY GROUP CONSULTATION
The home and the femily comprise the most important and informal agencies of
education. The family serves as the primary model for personality development.
The family is considered by several authorities as an extension of the individual
pCTSonality. Therefore, it is rightly held that "family systems of behaviour become
individual systems of personality".
Family groiq) consultation is a method of counselling that begins with an analysis
of the self-defining processes in each one of the four families in the group. This
method was introduced by the Counselling Centre for Adults and the Medical
School, Psychiatric Division of the Oregon State System of Higher Education in the
1960s. The method was evolved to meet the several referrals, made by school
guidance counsellors to the Centre, which showed no medical or psychiatric
pathology but were described as behaviour problems. Tlie counseUors first invite
the concemed famfiy of the client for an initial interview. In this initial session the
counsellors meet as many members of the family as are avaiUble and enter into a
sort of 'contract' which leads to the other stages. The other famiUes are also chosen
and met in this manner by the counsellors. Usually no more than four famUies are
group^. Pro^r caK is taten ta the choice and grouping of the fatniiies as weli asorienting each one of the faimhes such that they are able to co-operate with the
otherfamOy groups^e usual length of a tegular session is one Sda haK hot^ssplit into two parts. The first part is spent with all the member^H, ilS all the famUies. As there could be as many as aeach session, there is need for more than two counseUors to be nreopm,
the famUies. If there are sharp differences in age. Srfenc^^members, two or more sub-groups are formed. But as soon as !
and warmth of relation is experienced, the group is kept togetherT^ is establish^entii® session. The initial division is, therefore, for practical «
a ground work to reach an ^ropriate stage of rapport wheil^T ^brought together. The session is terminated precisely on time tn are
that might be evident among the members. reduce any anxietyEach family is seen by itself initially; then it is combinert «-.u u
second session onwards. There is nothing sacrosanct ahnnt .h ® ®
to be combined. Two or three famUies may be an ij. , of familiesincreased to four famUies if the heed arises. Even si^ ^consulted. But the famUy peer-group effect wUl not be ^
In actual practice the whole of the family wUl nm ^^^^ble in this case.'  """^^^a^ttblclothccottttsellor.


--- PAGE 247 ---
Special Areas In Counselling 227
Initially he has to work with the members he has been able to establish contact
with. Each of the families may be sensitive about certain issues. The counsellor
would do well to leave these sensitive issues alone. TTie families are helped to
discuss life events and through this learn in subtle ways and gain several insights.
It is the job of the counsellors to actively promote this intercourse. There is likely
to be initial resistance and the families should be allowed to overcome the resistance
and learn to narrate their stories naturally. Usually the ^ily group consultation
method needs as many as 8 to 12 sessions.
COUNSELLING FAMILIES
Family counselling is concerned with the family system and changes that can be
made in that system. In a sense, the client is the family. If the interaction of the
family with one of its individual members leads to stressit is a symptom of a sick
system. The symptom, if allowed to persist, may not only cause much misery to the
individual but also to the rest of the members in the family. Therefore, the practical
consequences are great. Different types of family counselling are in vogue. First
there is the conjoint family counselling in which the counsellor meets the family
and understands the patterns of interaction within the family. The focus is on the
family discord or problem. In this approach no member of the family is dealt with
individually. In the multiple impact counselling, several counsellors work with
individual members of the family intensively over a period of three to four days.In this approach also the focus is on the family system. The network counselling
approach starts in a concentric way, working with the unit (nuclear) family and
proceeding towards the neighbours, friends, relatives and others. The objective of
this approach is 'retribalization', that is, creating a social network for the individual
member or family in distress. Yet another approach is multiple family counselling
in which a number of families are brought together and are enabled to be counselled
simultaneously. This approach provides for different families, opportunities for
observation, imitation and identification with other families. This results in social
facilitation and reduction of social inhibition.
In clinical work with .individual patients it became increasingly obvious that
there was more to the problem than what the patient was apparently reporting. The
fact that the relationship between the patient and his family is of importance was
mcognized a long time ago. It was seen that communication between ^e individualmid the rest of the members in a family was in most cases muffled and barriers
seemed to be erected. In the early days of counselling the idea of family therapy
was suggested by the structuralist approach. This leads to questions like, "What is
the purpose of the family?", "How does it function?", "What roles are assigned to
its members?", "What are the goals of a family?", "Are the goals of the individual
at variance or in conflict with those of the family?". This points to the goal of
family counselling: "What should be the outcome of family counselling?", "Should
the relationshipCs) between the children be examined?" Family counselling aims at
some kind of change. What should the extent of change be? The techniques to be
used are only matters of detail. The goal of family counselling is not merely to


--- PAGE 248 ---
228 CoimsdIIng and Guidance
remove some symptoms but to create a new. way of living. This involves helping
people to express emotion. Within the family set-up individuals are either too rigid
or too fluid. Either of these is not desirable, for the former type of individuals are
blind to the new learning and the latter contribute to the destruction of family life.
The goal of healthy family relations is to strike a balance between the two extremes,
namely, continuity of the old and openness to the new experience. The family
change is facilitated by the counsellor by shifting the balance within the family and
by advising the members on how to relate to one another in new ways and if
necessary to examine its value system and provide for appropriate changes in it
The family is a complex entity comprising interlocking systems and sub-systems.
Fundamentally, the family is an affectual interaction system. The a^ectual system
within the family could be seen as interlocking triangles. So an affective method
of changing the family system involves 'detriangulation'. This is done by helping
the persons to respond to the system and not just react. The family changes when
the interlocking triangles change. The counsellor's intervention is most necessary
in this process The counsellor helps the members, for example, the marital partners,
to deHne and clariiy their roles and their relationship, to get detrianglcd from the
family emotional system, to learn other ways of functioning emotional systems by
communication of feelings. The counsellor can separate out their fantasies, feelings
and their thinking systems, thus enabling the persons to know themselves better and
also view others more objectively, leading to a better or higher level of maturity.
A person starts life as an undifferendated part of the family. In course of dme
he learns to establish his own identity and at an appropriate time separates himself
from his family. This involves forming new emotional attachments and the
detriangulation of other emotional relations.
An ecological perspecdve is emerging in family counselling. Ecology deals with
the relationship tetween organisms and their environment, the interplay between
the two and their interdependence. Here it refers to the interactions in the family
system among the members and their relationship to socie^, their neighbourhood,
school and other significant social systems. Acterman (1956, 58, 66, 70) places
enormous emphasis on this approach and holds that one cannot compartmentalize
individual, family and other social systems. Siuprisingly, nOt much work is done
with cultural factors in family counselling. In the multifamily counselling approach,
cultural differences are brought together when five to six families with different
backgrounds meet. Family counselling in the years to come must grapple with new
models.
COUNSELLING WITH FAMILIES CONCERNING CHILDREN
The family is the primary group of society. Its characteristic feature is the affective
bonds among the members in the family and a concern for each other. Counselling
cannot afford to ignore such an important aspect of human life. Family relations are
broadly of two types—the parent-child relations and the husband-wife relations.
When the members of the family are disunited, tension, distress and misery are the
natural outcomes. The family counsellor should help find ways and means of


--- PAGE 249 ---
Special Areas In Counselling 229
reducing, if not eliminating, the strife, mubial distrust and ill-will among the members
of the family. Most problems in family relations have been identified to result from
misunderstandings which is the layman's term for lack of communication. The
parent-child relationship comes under stresses and strains for very simple reasons.
Growth is a natural process and a normal phenomenon. Children grow and
consequently become progressively less dependent on their parents. Each family
has its own ethics and provides to its members a philosophy of life which is
communicated through non-verbal and informal means. Many a time parents forget
that children cannot be Judged from their own standards of morality or decency or
culture. Quite often parents try to compensate for their failures by wanting their
children to achieve what they could not. They tend to become unrealistic in their
demands and this causes fhistration on both sides.
Sometimes parents take decisions on behalf of, or for their children. These may
not be to the satisfaction of the children themselves and causes tension between the
parents and children. There could be fundamental diHerences in important issues
such as values and relatively unimportant ones such as fashions. The generation
gap leads to an identity crisis and sometimes to alienation which adversely affects
family health. There is yet another area of family relations which concerns sibling
relations. Most common conditions are sibling rivalry and jealousy and unfounded
antipathy among children in a family. Family counselling is concerned with these
and other related problems and aims at the release of tensions and the building up
of harmonious relations. The counsellor here uses the group counselling techniques
as well as individualized counselling techniques to resize his goals. He may have
a few sessions with the parents individually and then several with the children. The
major effort is towards increasing communication leading to better understanding
and appreciation of the individual members of the family. Unfortunately this area
has received minimal attention partly because it is very impracticable, especially in
a highly industrialized society, to be able to assemble all the members of a family
for coimsclling sessions.
COUNSELLING WITH PARENTS
Most problem children are products of problem homes. The disturbing features in
a home affect the harmonious development of the children. The incalculable harm
which parents do to their children is usually not grasped by most parents. Parent
counselling is aimed at helping parents become sensitive to the possible adverse
effect of their behaviour on their children. By helping the parents gain a better
understanding of themselves and their own personalities much harmony could be
effected.
Parent counselling deals with the area of parent-child relationships concerning
the dimension of dependence-independence. Most parents are deeply concerned
about the well-being of their children and are afraid that if left to themselves the
children may harm themselves. Hence they become over-protective which is resented
by the children. Another area of parent-child conflict concerns vocational choice.
Most parents begin with the presumption that they know what is best for their


--- PAGE 250 ---
230 Counselling and Guidance
children. Children have their own ideas and this usually results in a clash of ideas,
interests and personalities. Parent counselling thus is one of the important services
that can help foster a healthy home atmosphere.
It is becoming increasingly recognized that there should be a close liaison between
school and home, parents and teachers. For this purpose parent-teacher associations
(PTAs) have been formed. The schools managed by local self-government bodies
in India pay scant regard to the need for PTAs. A few missionary schools and
private schools have been successfully holding PTA meetings and reporting
encouraging results. It is firmly believed that there is a genuine need for counselling
parents.
Parent-teacher meetings are becoming more common in schools. A parent may
visit a teacher at the latter's request or a parent may want to know why his/her child
has not done well in a particular subject handled by the teacher or ask the teacher
for an explanation regarding a punishment to a pupil. There are other parents who
believe in having informal contacts and hence visit schools. Sometimes parents
may feel embarrassed or offended or belittled about being asked by the teacher to
go over to the school to discuss their child. Some parents get annoyed because they
believe that it is the business ofthe school to take complete charge of their children
and that they have no role to play.
Parents usually are a heterogeneous lot They have their own perceptions,
expectations, prejudices, likes and dislikes about the school or about individual
teachers. A teacher's ^prehensions of parents are not entirely unfounded. They
find that some of the parents are belligerent, fault-finding and unsympathetic. Some
parents are uncooperative and disinterested.
Parents understandably are indulgent and so they see their children in a different
light On the other hand, for the teacher, the child of a particular parent is one of
the several hundred pupils he may be seeing daily. The parent, as a parent, may not
be able to see the problem of his or her child as the teacher sees it (as a problem
of a member of his class). If the parent is told of a conduct problem of his child,
he may feel hurt, embarrassed and may even become disturbed. The parent may
take a defensive attitude or react in a hostile manner. Some parents may feel hurt
and become very apologetic. The counsellor has to see the pupil's actions without
bias and enlist the parent's cooperation for doing something positive for the child.
The parent, motivated by his protective instinct,may defend the child's actions. In
all such cases, the counsellor must behave with great caution and professional
experience to win over the confidence and trust of the parent and help him see the
shortcomings or the problems of his child in an objective manner. This requires a
considerable amount of sympathetic understanding of the parent. When once the
parent's confidence and trust are secured, it becomes easy to enlist his/her
cooperation. The assurance of confidentiality and privacy will reassure him/her.
Some parents have difficulty in expressing themselves. A parent may be reluctant
to talk. The counsellor has to first establish a warm relationship to open up lines
of free communication by talking about the positive aspects. The parent's initial
resistance can be overcome slowly with patient handling. This brings home the
importance of good relationships for the natural release of feelings. By adopting an
understanding attiuide, the defensive reactions of the parent can be surmounted and


--- PAGE 251 ---
Special Areas In Counselling 231
by persuading the parent to talk, his inhibitions can be overcome. It is always
necessary to remember that the manner in which the parent sees the probem of his
child may be very different from the way in which the teacher or counsellor sees
it The important objective of a parent-teacher conference is to gain insight into the
child's behaviour to get a proper perspective from the point of view of the classroom
situation and the home environment If the parent thinks that he has to take the
blame for the failing of his child he may take a hostile attitude towards the school
but if the parent is made to feel that he will be helping in the resolution of his
child's problems, he will take a different attitude. In the course of the meeting the
parent may even be prepared to recognize the problems of his child which he would
have otherwise stoutly rejected if presented in a different manner.
Sometimes parents' help is sought to gain some information about the child's
personality problems. Such information concerning the pupil may go a long way in
resolving his problem and help him in his scholastic work.
In most PTA meetings, group sessions can be organized to use the group approach
to resolve problems. In group situations people see their problems in relation to
other people's problems and find them similar and, therefore, not unique.
Understanding insights can help a great deal in reducing the tensions and anxieties
of parents.
COUNSELLING THE DELINQUENT
Delinquency is a symptom of emotional immaturity leading to socially unacceptable
or reprehensible behaviour of the youth. Delinquency is one of the most common
problems reported among the post-puberty or early adolescent children. One of the
common symptoms of delinquency is truancy. Delinquents commit petty offences
like thieving, shoplifting, and so on. Most delinquents are emotionally immature
and their behaviour is a compensatory reaction. Sometimes it becomes an act of
gangsterism. The emotional upheaval and brittleness resulting fham rapid physical
growth and accelerated endocrinal functioning result in extra energy seeking
expression in suitable outlets. There is also a greater need for recognition. Horror,
crime and other movies as well as stmy books provide the adolescent with a
convenient form for day-dreaming and self-identification. Most adolescents limit
themselves to day-dreams. But a few also resort to socially unacceptable means of
expressing their energies to seek recognition. They fail to adapt and adjust to social
norms. Counselling of such people is not easy.
The following case illustrates the need for counselling assistance. Mr. Dever is
a 19-year old flrst year degree student He is well-built and of robust health. vHe
hails from a medium-sized town and belongs to the middle class socio-economic
group. He is very much interested in athletics and is popular with his fnends. He
appears to be very well adjusted. He has a good social life and enjoys it He is the
elder of two brothers. His parents are greatly concerned about his future. Devw
feels that somehow he is not given sufficient freedom at home and believes that he
is treated as a child by his mother. His marks are below average and he does not
aiq>ear to be worried about doing any better. He believes that somehow the good


--- PAGE 252 ---
232 Counselling and Guidance
points in him are not getting due recognition. Therefore, he feels there is no need
to work any harder. Under the garb of his hard-working, cautious and ambitious
nature there is a strong undercurrent of nervousness, self-consciousness,
discouragement, unhappiness and anxiety. He takes a very aggressive posture to
impress his personality upon his peers. He is known to indulge in petty offences
and has been apprehended and left off with warning but he persists in his behaviour
and there is no sign of relenting.
COUNSELLING RELUCTANT CLIENTS
Counselling, we have observed earlier, is help voluntarily sought by the client. But
this is not always the case. Occasionally counsellors have to work with clients who
are reluctant to discuss matters with the counsellor. Such clients can be identified
in different situations like the school, home and work situations. Reluctant clients
are usually those who are the referral cases. They may show open defiance or
express their reluctance in more passive ways. They do not take any responsibility
and exhibit an unwillingness to communicate. The counsellors find that they exhibit
non-facilitative emotions.
Counsellors also sometimes become highly anxious and feel inadequate when
dealing with non-communicative clients. Some counsellors may become angry with
clients owing to a feeling of frusuation or a sense of loss of status and prestige. In
most situations the counsellor should learn to deal with himself non-defensively to
be able to successfully cope with reluctant clients. Let us take, for example, the
case of a tenth grade pupil. His academic achievement was in the range of superior
to very superior. Suddenly something went amiss and he started scoring lower
grades. He also became a regular defaulter in submitting home assi^ipients. This
exhibition of a kind of indifference to classwork persisted for some time and was
noticed by his teacher who was surprised and shocked that such a bright pupil
should progressively deteriorate in this way. The pupil was referred to the counsellor.
The counsellor assured the student that there was no question of punishing him for
anything. All that was planned was to have a firee and friendly chat with him. When
the pupil felt sufficiently at ease, the counsellor opened the records and slowly read
the pupil's grades, term after term, making sure to impress on him how fast his
grades had declined. The pupil appeared to agree with the situation but believed
that gradually the marks would improve. The counsellor asked the pupil to explain
how he was going to do this. This helped the pupil to open up to the counsellor.
There was some problem at home that bothered him very much but he was unable
to do anything about it except feel unhappy and miserable. Session after session,
the counsellor met the pupil and followed upon the situation at home and in the
process also helped to make the pupil realize that there was no reason for his
academic work to suffer due to the problems at home. Counselling helped the pupil
to make a self-examination of his situation and to realize that his indifference was
only a reaction to his dissatisfaction with his home life. With such an insight the
pupil began working again at the normal level and quickly regained his lost position
in class.
. I,


--- PAGE 253 ---
SpedaJ Areas In Counselling 233
MARRIAGE COUNSELUNG
Marriage counselling is indeed\^a very wide field and has three important areas,
namely, pre-marital counselling, counselling for belter marital harmony and
counselling to eliminate or forestall a marriage ft'om breaking up.
Owing to the tradidonal nature of Indian society, marital counselling has not
gained importance. Basically marital counselling is not different firom individual
counselling. In the case of individual counselling the counsellee is the individual
client. In marriage counselling the client is not either of the married partners but
the marriage relationship itself. Counselling helps in the understanding of this
marriage relationship and in putting it in its proper perspective. Marriage counselling
is looked upon as a form of crisis -intervention. If the precipitating events are
understood, something can be done to forestall the crisis itself. The preventive
aspect should receive attention first, whjie intervention can be conveniently dealt
with later.
A crisis in marriage relationships could arise from the intrusion of a third party.
If this third party has affective relationships, it could cause an emotional turmoil
leading to a crisis. Another factor that could pose a threat to a marriage is the
change in the family structure. A third source of crisis could be illness in the femily.
Another source of tension could result from strong likes and dislikes and a difference
in beliefs and life styles of the couple which have recently emerged owing to some
extraneous factor(s). Other causes may be financial upsets and changes in the work
situations. Such precipitating factors could cause much stress and strain in the
family.
Marriage is an important event in the life of an individual. It has a number of
dimensions and functions. Most religions, with the exception of Islam, consider
marriage as a sacrament and not a social contracL Oriental societies like the Japanese,
Chinese and Indian societies have a highly conventional and traditional conception
of marriage. In these societies it is not merely a matter concerning two individuals
but is looked upon as an event involving families and communities at large.
Therefore, the question of individual choice of a mate or partner is limited. The
consent and approval of the family and acceptance of the new member into the
family becomes the desideratum. This conventional idea of marriage as a sacred
bond between two individuals or as an indissoluble union-, become|.^uite difficult
to accept with the stresses of rapid industrialization and urbanization. In western
societies, perhaps owing to historical reasons, liberal attitudes are current in so far
as marriage is concerned. The enactment of civil laws solemnizing marriages have
further made them quite unconventional. Secular ideas of marriage have propagated
the view that marriages are matters of convenience, and if one of the parties chooses
to get out of it he/she should have the freedom to do so. The force of this argument
has compelled social legislation to be enacted in almost all countries providing for
divorce under certain stipulated conditions. The twin issues of marriage and divorce
loom large in social and domestic lives.
American society evolved several new conventions and customs, one of which
concerns marital counselling. This is the institution of 'dating'. This is a unique
ejq>eriment which has come to characterize the American social system. Dating is
1 .-Ml


--- PAGE 254 ---
234 Counsetling and Guidance
a socially approved and normal practice. The young boys and girls meet ^veraltimes by themselves to understand each other better before stepping into matrimony.Usually dating is also considered an index of social success and social desirability.
Marital counselling has evolved in the US culture as an important service to help
secure happy marriages.
In recent times, studies have revealed that marital counselling has come to be
a continuous process with its beginnings in the days of coiuTship, its course
progressing through marriage to times of stress prior to the parting of ways. The
marriage counsellor must be acutely aware of the philosophy and objectives of
marriage. People enter into marriage for happiness, companionship and affection.
More aspects should also naturally enter into matrimonial alliances. In an open
socie^ where the individuals are free to choose their partners in marriage the
relationship is one of understanding and regard for each otfier. Fepj)le many out of
such considerations as wealth, position, or attraction for the personality, of the
partner. This latter aspwt is usually termed love. The counsellor has a very important
role here in helping the parties understand each other such that they are not
overwhelmed by fanciful misconceptions. Each must seek the other for what he or
she is and emotion should not be permitted to have, the better of reason.
The second aspect of matrimony concerns compatibility. Can incompatibilities
sustain a marriage for long? The parlies to the marriage should have similar attitudes,
interests, cultures, likes, value systems and, so on. A fundamental aspect of
compatibility is age. People of different ages will not have similar interests. Age
is also important from the viewpoint of sex gratification. It is a physiological fact
that the sex urge is at its peak in early adulthood. As individuals grow older the
urge is expected to progressively become less dominant The marital counsellor
cannot under-estimate or afford to ignore the role of sex in marriage. Sex is a
means for human beings to obtain stimulation and gratification through their senses.No r^igion. either primitive or modem, no society, aboriginal or civilized and nolaw, barbarian or progressive, has ever underestimated the importance of sex in
m^ge. The marriage counsellor has to keep this in focus aU the time when heIS involved in mantal counselling.
inc^SfS^^f f i"'® t'^ficulUes owing to several problems resulting frominvfti empathy, communication and other specific problems,
premarital counselung
Sy1nri"vSme^'o°Z^^^ « -ate. Thiseach other from their chUdhood or ^
each other or who may be acquaintances or w^n ^to-day life as coworkers. class fellows etc An
implication that the partneis to a rnarital'relatiMim n bym Indian society, most marriages are airaneed^rt ^ ®^8ers. However,®  are arranged and partners, more often than not.


--- PAGE 255 ---
Special Areas In Counselling 235
are strangers to each other. In the Indian situation the social fabric does not permit
a period of courtship. This, therefore, requires treatment on a different footing. In
most of the western societies, the premarital stage is considered a very vital stage
in determining the success or failure of marriage. The institution of dating and oth^
such socially approved ways of meeting each other are aimed at an understanding
of each other such that mutual bonds of liking and affection can grow. Several
affairs end abruptly at this stage, while a few others continue for very long but
ultimately break down. Premarital counselling seeks to preclude such a situation.
The counsellor helps the parties to gain a fuller understanding of themselves as this
is basic for a happy marriage. Affairs which have nothing besides physical anraction
or sex gratification to sustain them cannot last long. The problem of choosing a
partner and entering matrimony is assuming great significance in modem
industrialized and urbanized societies where every person works to make a living.
A career is, as important if not more, in the context of the women's liberation
movement The concept of male domination which is to be countered by the female
leads to quite a few problems.
Marriages run into problems due to lack of understanding between partners,
leading to strained relations. This situation would seldom result if couples were to
have an empathy for each other. It is perhaps the surest means of making the
marriage a success. Empathy has to be cultivated and is one of the important factors
for the sustained growth of a husband and wife relationship.
Marital problems result in stresses and strains owing to lack of communication
or faulty communication. Misinformation breeds misunderstandings and tends to
create an information vacuum.
The socio-economic factors that make or mar a happy marriage concem finances,
social life, religious and other values.
Finances—^Finance could cause enormous inter-personal strains as it is one of
the important means of satisfying many needs. Scarce finances could cause serious
problems of adjustment.
Social life—With the tirban and metropolitan conditions of life, there is much
scope for socializing. Individuals have their own clubs and associations. Sometimes
excessive socializing could lead to misunderstandings and conflicts.
Religious and other values—^Most societies attach great importance to religious
values. When one of the partners changes his/her religion the other is free to
dissolve the marriage.
Relatives and dependants—^Interference by members in the family, such as in-
laws can jeopardise a happy marriage.
Occupational demands— couples may have very little time to be together
and may feel aggrieved because of the enforced lack of communication. In seeking
out avenues of personal activity they may seriously hinder a successful marriage.
The most important problem centres around sex conflicts. Marriage counsellors
have to skillfully deal with the underlying psychological problems that serioiisly
hamper a successful marriage. Frigidity on the part of the wife and impotency on
the part of the husband are the most common factors which wreck a marriage or
make the partner a neurotic. Frigidity and impotency could result from either
physiological or psychological factors or from teth. The counsellor must have a


--- PAGE 256 ---
Z36 Counselllns and Guidance
knowledge of the problems that could lead to the dysfunciioning of the sexual lifeof the couple.
Structuring
Marital counselling, we have seen, is a very delicate process and it has to be
handled with enormous care with different kinds of clients. There cannot \ie a fixed
or a set approach. The first prerequisite of a counsellor is to understand his role as
clearly as possible. For example, he should recognize that he is not an arbitrator- |
He is not supposed to be telling the couple who is right and who is wrong. His role ,
is essentially confined to helping the parties understand themselves and each other.
This process of understanding is assisted by helping the members learn more aboutthemselves. Most human beings suffer from myopic understanding of themselves.
Sometimes they refuse to recognize their own faults or weaknesses. The client has
to be helped to discover for himself his fdllngs by an indirect and least upsetting
process. The counsellor has to use his skills with the utmost care and perhaps theclient-centred approach or the non-directive approach is the most appropriate.
In stnicuiring the siuiation the counsellor is concerned with the mechanics of the
situation. Structuring is usually concerned with the liming of the counselling sessions,
their duration, a definition or at least an indication of the client's responsibility,
One important fact that the client must learn is that the counsellor is not there to
give solutions; he only provides them with a sense of orientation which enables
them to believe that a solution has to be found on the basis of their own involvement
Marital counselling, like any other counselling, is stricUy voluntary. Clients seek
assistance on their own and the counsellor offers assistance only when it is soughf
for by the clients.
Another issue in structuring concerns the fees. The scale of fees has to be
worked out both by the counsellor and the clients. The timing and duraUon of thecounseUing sessions also have to be worked out to the mutual convenience of the
cUents and the counsellor. The counsellor should make the clients understand theimportance of tune and should not encourage a laissez-faire atUtude on the part of
the clients.
As counseUing is a profwsional service and has an ethical code, it respects theconfidences of the clients. T^ counsellor has to secure the trust of the clients and
estabUsh a healthy ra^rt Chems do not usually volunteer information and thecounseUor has to^lfully elicit iL Another very fundamental and important aspect
of marital counsemng concerns refer^ For instance, in matters concerning physicalaspects of sex. the rounsellor should make a proper referral to the appropriatespecialist ^d ^tam the ne^sary help. ^ should not subsUmte heresay informationfor specialist toowledge. There could be factors involving health A referral mayhave to be made to a physic^. SomeUmes it may even be neces^to make areferral to a psychiatnsL '
COUNSEILWC WOMEN
I„ the late sixties a pepuUst and vocal woman'i liberation movement made its


--- PAGE 257 ---
appearance. Marriage is no longer the only option for every woman. Some wom«i
deliberately opt out of matrimony Or choose to bear no children and become
careerists. The modem woman is in a world of transition with no specific traditions
or convendons to guide her. So in trying to find their feet women are se^ng
counselling assistance. Counselling of women has become a special area of concern
in modem times. It was traditionally believed that men and women difiered
significantly from each other in their physical capacities. The most crucial question
today is whether, owing to such physical differences, the status and role of then and
women in society should differ. If so, should women be assi^ed to inferior positions?
While men have a very large number of occupations to choose fiom, the occupations
open to women are vay restricted. Som^ow literature and story books have
presented women as dependent on men, docile and shy, and hardly ever as great'
intellects, successful scientists, mathematicians, or researchers.
Women today have more avenues open to them than their counterparts had in
the first part of the tw^tielh century. Many significant changes have taken place
owing to the two World wars, knowledge explosion, urbanization and
industrialization. Modem expectations in advanced societies place severe strains on
those women who continue to conform to the out-moded sex-role stereotype.
The male stereotype is regarded more positively. Broverman, et aL (1972) have
reported that women have more negative self-concepts than men. An interesting
study made by GoldbCTg (1971) reveals that when professional articles w^ to be
evaluated by women, they generally under-valued them when they thought that the
authors of those papers were women. Wolfe (1969) argues that the sex role identity
is closely related to the careers chosen by women. Hom^ (1970) concludes that
"when the fear of success interferes with the desire to be successful the result is an
inhibition of achievement motivation". Many young women, according to her, have
a conflict between their need for achievement and the need to conform to their
female image. Such conflicts lead to negative emotional consequences.
Owing to extensive western influences, expanding avenues for education and
wider employmrat opportunities, most beliefs about women once held rigidly by
our socie^ are no longer accepted as tenable universal truths. Whether acc^ted by
all or not, change is obviously the order of the world. This is not just a phenomenon
limited to India. The last two centuries have brought about many significant changes
all over the world, leading to a weakening of the hold of conventional customs,
traditions and beliefs. Owing to the disintegration of old values and beliefs, one of
the foremost gains of the new generation is the freedom of choice. Freedom of
choice is typically a new freedom for women. While it is true that most women are
not yet-aware of this freedom and continue to live in blissful ignorance under the
shadow of time-worn conventions and traditions; some women have certainly
exercised their choices freely. The only option for women was marriage and continues
to be so for many even today. But with education, wider and more attractive
opportunities for employment, this belief has been sufficiently eroded. Women in
increasing numbers are pursuing several non-traditional occupations, with some
even choosing to remain single.
Women from lower economic strata have been working from the ancient times
due to economic reasons. They have been working out in the fields and in cottage


--- PAGE 258 ---
238 Comselling and Guidance
industries, sharing the economic burden with their men folk in order to support
their families. Today women are working shoulder-lo-shoulder with men in several
avenues not considered traditional occupations for them. Notwithstanding all this,
women are considered inferiw and dependent. The traditional occupations of teaching
and nursing were considered most appropriate for women as they involve caring
and nursing. Though the same avenues continue to attract women in large numbers,
more women are now entering non-traditional areas and for reasons other than
economic considerations. An outstanding contribution of education has been instilling
the spirit of freedom and self-depen^nce in the minds of men and women. Modem
women have increasingly come to realize the need for economic self-sufficiency
and independence. It is only when the two needs are squarely met that women can
think of and appreciate the vital importance of freedom of choice. The basic tenet
of counselling and guidance is that for self-actualization, the individuals need to be
free first.
Sex stereoQ^ are tradidonally promoted through socializaUon. The educational
system also reinforces the sex stereotypes as an important agency of socialization.
A belief based on these stereotypes is that the sexes are unequal and are, therefore,
suited for different vocations. Social and economic roles are also determined by the
sex stereotypes. Thus women s role was always limited to domestic work and
home-making. A woman is expected to play a subservient role and not lake any
decision. evM in matlem conceming the home. All decision-making is a man'sprerogauve, TTik belief ,s sup^ited by sex stereotypes, cestoms and traditions ofmost stKteues all over the world, B«,des this, women are believed, mislalcenly, tohave Jfferenl tetnperaments and abdmes that prevent them from hetag independent
r  sexes afe not me. In
SS^es'stpSirr' ™ .ufei^wtt -s.The Indian stereo^ of a woman has
Women are accorded a lower status in society and are
They are considered poor risk-takers and are believJ^I^'" fnrchallenging jobs of stress. This explains the smaller nnmt^ ^ delicate fooccupational areas. The conservative attitudes are "» ^'^hefand the Middle-east countries. Owing to s»iph j '"^rked in the Onentaltraditionally denied reasonable opportunities ennai women have been
In the context of wider and greater opportunSc folwidening of avenues for employment, modem liberalization ^d
world to explore and exploit This implies and invT^" ®should exercise their choice with sufficient unft^x awareness thai women
world. They have to enter and pursue occunatf^^ul'"® themselves and of the.both economically self-sufficient and socially ind"^ ^ suited to them to becomethe basis of gender does not stand to reason Wo division of work onnumb^s. what has traditionally been the exclusiv "t increasing
and many are even pursuing traditional male iobs^o'^-^'^^ masculine worldseated conventionalism, women themselves hav<. ^ hegemony of deep-"®®ome responsible for their inferior


--- PAGE 259 ---
Speda] Areas In Coimsdllng 239
social and economic status and have been victims of traditional stereotypes. Since
they wrongly believe themselves to be unfit for certain types of work, they apparently
conform to this belief and develop negative self-concepts and accept an inferior
status as natural. The substitution of conservative sexist stereotypes by rational and
scientific ideas will lead to appropriate and positive attitudes towards women.
In counselling women it is important to jettison these false and untenable ideas.
Only then can female counsellee(s) be helped, to outgrow the discriminatory
stereotypes. The counsellor should strive to bring their biased negative feelings into
the open so that they are able to think better of themselves rationally. It is not often
easy, if not impossible, for the counseUee(s) to face the traditional stereotypes
boldly. Sympathy, understanding and persuasion are necessary' to put them onlireir
feet. Otherwise, the exercise of counselling may fall into the danger of perpetuating
the very stereotypes it struggles to discard and dismiss. There could be unconscious
biases and feelings which the counsellee should be helped to become aware of. The
counsellor may have to help the counsellee discard her personal sex-role bias through
sensitivity training.
The technique found always useful is the method of raising consciousness, which
could serve as a take-off stage. An example of raising consciousness would be a
session in which a small number of women students are made to sit in a circle and
asked to talk freely about their experiences in school/college and at the place of
work. The other students in the class may listen to the discussion and comment on
it The free exchange of ideas often reveals several instances of blatant discrimination.
However, merely becoming aware of social discrimination is not enough. It must
be followed up by appropriate action. More often than not, some of tlie women
students may be subtly discouraged even to choose non-traditional careers unwittingly
by the counsellors. Women counsellors are often in conflict over the variety of
choices open to them because they are brought up with the old conservative cultural
ideals. Most educated women today know that the contemporary world is different
ftom that of their mothers and grandmothers. Yet they are emotionally tossed
between the bid and time-worn ideas and the new ideas.
An important area of counselling deals with lack of confidence. Often people
pursue the path of least resistance. It is necessary to overcome the inertia and lack
of confidence. The counsellor must help build self-confidence not merely at the
intellectual level but also at the affective level, i.e., counsellee should be made to
feel self-confident enough to express herself freely and act accordingly.
Counselling of women presents many challenging issues and fascinating
possibilities.
.Middle-aged women who are brought up traditionally, often find themselves
left in a void, facing identity crisis. Their children are grown up and preoccupied
with their studies and other vocations. They no longer need the mother to do
anything for them. The husband is busy with his occupation and mostly lives in a
world of his own. In such a situation, the middle-aged wife feels lonely, with very
little work of her own. She begins to feel that she is not needed any longer by her
children and husband. She may become depressed and withdrawn. She develops a
feeling of emptiness and devoid of purpose in life. This feeling of void must be
overcome and can be tackled best by finding a suitable employment so that her time


--- PAGE 260 ---
240 Counsefirjigard Cufdance
is used gainfully to her satisfaction. Counselling can help take her mind offbrooding.
The third and perhaps the most commonly experienced area, is the conflict o
woman's dual role as wife and career woman. This involves strong and inhW
subjective feelings and experiences. There is no easy solution to this. However, thcounsellor can play the role of a sympathetic listener and enable the counsell^resolve her conflict She could perhaps take the help of child-care or day-ca^centres. Another iroblem commonly expwienced by women is one of
image. They have to be helped to redefine themselves in the light of role stereotype
and to improve their self-conc^t They can be given appropriate reading maien^to help redefine their concept of self. They may be helped by employing the^ve ^ique to brame aware of their potentialities and to work lowh™'fillfillmg them. Use of chem-centred techniques could be of ereat value m th
regard. "
Ute next ta^t area of conaseiiing is that of career guidance. DiffeK"'women have different concerns. There are women who:
1. have remained single
2. have no chiidr^
3. have heavy family responsibilities
4.areatiddle-ag«laadwhofeel.K>loager„eededbytheirchUdreaandhusbani
Counselling women is somewhat differpntft. . r itapraseo^women, the problems are usually more ^ ^ counsellmg men. In theassistance provided in all instances would ^ of
with high-school girls must plan with an p he
encouraged to ^m high. They should be ® h , we"
qualified in order to aim for hioher.iPi^i • appreciate the need to berecognize that owing to sex role stprprx. ^ context, it is ttecessary
do not pursue studies in order to obtain^i,^'^ beliefs, most ^at high school or at best aftw the fir« i education. They tend to ^'th^ .
avenues become highly restricted Thp^!. ^ all such cases, occupationlevels and with differ aS' tofcae. has to work at diffe;^^^
counseUeesseektrainingindifferentopp,,^?^'^ guidance to help wornand circumstances. to suit their individual potenoahtiCounselling of women presents m -nff
possibmties.ForexampIe.middle.aRed^^^ challenging issues andare exposed to new situations and *ho are brought up taditionally ^have ditflcrtty in eoatonaiag to '"E'>ly industrialized inodeffl Wmtdd^aged woman fmda that her cw£ an identity crisis. With" 'with his occupatioaai demands ,1,. r ^ "e grown „n i,„ n„.h.nd is
area of eoooselhng mt, women cmctS^ at her age. So one
°  conc47wr"'"""S middlLged women,hut IS unable to do. because, she doTootr™™ *"«> ^tows what she wants to ®Another category of women may STve a or educat^jI between career and marrrS®


--- PAGE 261 ---
Special Areas In Counselling 241
may experience feelings of helplessness. Yet another kind of conflict may arise
when a woman finds that her career projects an image which is incompatible with
that of her husband's professional image.
Thus counselling concerns several vital problems. The first concerns family
health and education. With the population explosion there is an urgent need for
women to be appropriately counselled regarding family health. Next, there is a need
to help them understand their roles as normal adult members of society. There is
a need for adjustment and acceptance of behavioural norms appropriate to her sex.
The above can be illustrated with the help of a few case studies. Consider the case
of a woman who is not prepared for the kind of situation she finds herself in,
following a divorce or the demise of her husband. The woman may not have cared
to acquire any skills and/or to attend college. Finding a suitable vocation for such
an in^vidual is a problem. Counselling with women thus concerns preparing women
to face the challenges of transitions in life situations. Counsellors have to be creative,
innovative, ingeneous and prepared to improvize to guide each woman in need of
help and follow a course most appropriate for her in the light of her educational
background, talents, capacities and opportunities.
COUNSELLING WEAKER SECTIONS
One of the characteristic features of the Indian socie^ is the diversity of its people.
Though India has been the seat of one of the great ancient civilizations, it has,
paradoxically for over three centuries, if not more, been an underdeveloped country.
This backwardness has brought into relief the differences between various sections
of socie^. After independence, contemporary society has been in the throes of
socio-economic and political change. Several divisive forces, the origins of which
are vague and unclear, have sprung up. In course of time, the different communal
segments grew overly self-conscious and increasingly suspicious of each other.
Even after nearly five decades of freedom, communal cleavages not only continue
to exist, they are growing wider and deeper. Psychologically speaking, the social
ph^omenon of pluralism reflects the fact that the social groups exist sq)arately for
whatever reason, naturally or voluntarily or out of compulsion. They develop diffbrrat
languages, habits, mannas, social attitudes, prejudices, perceptions of themselves
and others, values and norms that guide their behaviour. Consequently, they beccHne
culturally different The members of the Indian society are identified as separate
ar)d unequal groups and this fact is seen throughout the social order. The groups
cultivate mutual distrust and misunderstanding of one another, resulting in ill-will
among themselves. Notwithstanding all professions of national and social integration,
the diff^ences create serious prejudices and rifts among different communities.
The socio-economically weaker sections, or Scheduled Castes comprise several
groups that have serious differences among themselves. The only common facttH"
is the socio-economic backwardness forced upon them from generations and reeling
under its oppressive tyranny, thus developing serious feelings of inferiority. The
differences are reflected in deficiencies of language, values, education, income,
housing and general cultural lifestyles. Consequently, the members of these groups


--- PAGE 262 ---
242 Cotmsdllng and Guidance
have been socially discriminated and, until the late 1930s, were treated as
untouchables.
Counselling the weaker sections needs special attention and care. Counselling is
a dynamic, purposeful, psychological interaction and its goal is to assist the
counsellee(s) adjust more effectively and qualitatively belter to environmental
demands- In tmler to be successful, the counsellor should be able to relate himself
to the client(s) optimally. He must be able to reasonably assess the client's state of
adjustment and must know what ought to be done to help the client improve his/
her current adjuslmenL It should be recoffiized that cultiual differences affect the
ability of the counsellor to relate himself to his client and to discuss the problems
he may encountw in making a diagnosis of the socially and economically weak
client The difficulties inherent in arriving at a warm and purposeful relationship
are outlined below.
Relatfonshlp
CorniselUng is a dynamic process and the snccess or otherwise squarely depends on
the r^ of therelauonshtp. CounseUing. ipso facto implies ra^flrTt is a Mendlyrelantm^p of mutual trtmt and confldeuce which underlies the KtaWshmenl of a
r, Rapport enables the courtseliee(s)
spoken and unspoken, plays a vital role. The connsAir^"^'^®' Communication,
of belonging and feel that the counseUor is one experience a senseni^inorities and weaker sections differ in « •
a suspicion in their minds regarding the dominthnl^t^ ^ alwayscounsellor should not give rise to feelings thath groups. Therefore, theprivileged section. He should not appear over-svtn^ to a higher social or
his attitude being interpreted as condescension t, l^ere is a danger ofmiddle-of-the-road tqjproach rather than take extrp ^ desirable to pursue the
or very sympathetic. positions—either very critical
Structuring
nie counsellees have, by and large, limited exneri
TTiey are usually not able to understand the rm fif ^ ^ professionals.• - counsellor should structure or define ^ 1" such contexts
p them understand what is reouired af .l. ® clients fcounselleesl and


--- PAGE 263 ---
Spedal Areas In Counselling 243
to culturally impoverished backgrounds, are unable or unwilling to participate in
the counselling exploration. Therefore, techniques such as prolonged silence should
be avoided. Until positive rapport has been established, the counsellor should pay
more than usual attention to structuring the counselling situation.
Resistance
The counsellee's opposition to the goals of counselling is referred to as resistance.
It manifests itself in a variety of ways such as self-devaluation, intellectualization
and even overt hostility. The counsellor may be unfamiliar with the nuances of the
cultures of the weaker sections and assess their behaviour as an instance or just
another effect of social and economic deprivation. Sometimes resistance is exhibited
as not coming on time for the counselling session or being irregular to sessions or
even failure to keep the appointment(s). Clients of the weaker sections are often
v^ reluctant to disagree. They often silently acquiesce and appear to accept the
counsellor superficially. Sometimes they may be uncooperative with the counsellor
or with someone of higher status.
I
Transference
An individual's reaction to a person in the present in a manner similar to the way
he has reacted to another person in the past is called transference. In other words,
transference is the repetition of an old relationship in a new situation which may
appear embarrassing to the counsellor or other persons. Transference may be
conscious or unconscious, positive or negative. It is a form of resistaiice to the
goals of counselling. The socially backward clients expect the counsellor to exhibit
majority-group attitudes either because of direct experience with such persons or
because of socialization which causes them to react to members of majority-groups
with suspicion. School counsellors who are perceived as outsiders find these pupils
hesitant, shy and reluctant to talk freely.
Counter-transference
Transference is a counsellee reaction to the counsellor in a manner he reabted to
some other person in the past. It is transferring of the counsellee's feelings towards
another person to the counsellor. In counter-transference the reverse is implied. The
counsellor transfers his feelings to the counsellee. It leads to persistent, inappropriate
behaviour towards the counsellee and enormous strain in the counselling relationship
owing to preconceived ideas about the weaker sections. A common expression of -
counter-transference is the counsellor's tendency to be excessively sympathetic and
indulgent with the' clients. The counsellor often considers it appropriate to use a
different set of criteria (achievement, performance, etc.) for the socially backward.
This does no good to the client and may even lead to the pygmalion eff^t
Language
Language is part of an individual's culuire or sub-culture. InabiliQ' to comprehend';
lanpiflgft results in failure to understand the Vlient. In order to communicate


--- PAGE 264 ---
244 Counselling and Guidance
effectively, the counsellor must be able to understand the verbal and non-verbal
language of his counsellees. It is more difficult to understand non-verbal
communication. Individuals speak not just with their voices but also with their
gestures. Knowledge of a client's language and its nuances are important in
counselling, because most counselling techniques demand a good understanding of
this in order to be able to establish rapport
Psycholo^cal Barriers
Self'dlsdosure
This is the willingness to let another person know about what one thinks or feels
or wMts. It is basic to the counseUing process that the relationship should be open
as it is crucial to the establishment and maintenance of rapport Thus it is a pre
requisite for achieving the goals of counselling. Reluctance to disclose on the part
of the counsellee is a serious problem to contend with.
SelF-batred
Socially and economically weaker individuals sometimes tend not only to despise
their groups, but also hate themselves for being members of this group.
Personalism
Mother stubborn counselling barrier often experienced is personalism. It suggestsat individuals are more interested in their consideration for people than for
procedures.
Listening
Sym^thedc listening is the heart of the counselling process. It is often fallaciouslyconsi a p^ive activity. Owing to inappropriate socialization, many socially
S  7 individuals are poor in listening skills. Their homes are often fiUedn and confusion with everybody talking simultaneously. The young ones
n earn not to listen but to emotions. A blank stare or an empty facial expression
often means that the client has not followed what has been said.
Mocfes^
Mo^ty, usually considered a desirable quality, is not quite useful in counselling,
^  counsellee is too modest A false sense of modesty blocksexpression of overt negative feelings. Such blockages are not helpful in counselling.
Diagnosing
f!! achieve the goals of counselling, the counsellor must be able to relateth». The counsellor must be able to determine
rfflffnnc'c * ^ ^ existence. To be able to assess what needs to be done, goodv nrtt 'i with socially weaker clients, accurate diagnosis1  n y I icu t but also often not possible. In employing standardized diagnostic


--- PAGE 265 ---
Special Areas In Counselling 245
instruments, the counsellor may not always be able to diagnose correctly. There are
several problems inherent in the use of standardized instruments with clients from
weaker sections. There are, at the outset, several situational problems. In addition,
the client's anxiety may affect test performance. Clients are almost always unfamiliar
with test situations and tliis may prove to be a barrier. It may be more helpful to
use non-standardized procedures such as observation, anecdotal records, interviews
and the like.
Intervention
Determining preventive and corrective measures is quite difficult and applying
them to socially disadvantaged clients is not easy.
The most important of all is the counsellor's attitude. The counsellor should
exhibit an attitude of uncondU'ional self-regard towards his clients.
COUNSELLING DRUG ADDICTS
Many psychological aspects of drug addiction represent non-adjustive behaviour
that some individuals resort to. Broadly speaking, the reactions of drug addicts fall
under the category of character disorders. In the last three decades, the phenomenon
of drug abuse has assumed enormous proportions and has become a very serious
threat to order and society's survival. Hence it demands urgent consideration. In the
early decades of the twentieth century, alcoholism posed a serious social problem
and usually involved adults and older persons. Now drug addiction has taken roots
among adolescents and youth. It does not of course mean that it ceases to be an
adult problem. Those who pick up this habit become wrecked personalities.
Over the last three decades, there has been a sea change in the socio-economic
conditions of the youth. They are becoming highly politicized. Owing to defective
economic planning and educational policies, more and more youth are being turned
out of colleges and schools with degrees and diplomas that are not worth the paper
on which they are printed. More youth arc becoming unemployable and are
disillusioned because the education tiiey have received was not designed to equip
them with skills or competencies for the employment market. Naturally, there is
growing frustration. Those in colleges and schools, seeing and knowing the plight
of their" seniors, are becoming anxious, losing faith in the value of their education.
They are also exposed to other tensions and stresses present in the society, owing
to socio-economic and political factors. Youth are becoming alienated. They have
strong feelings of 'anomie'. Some experience identity crises and develop feelings
of distress. All these factors lead to unrest, stress and strain in the youth. The
restless state of mind often makes weak-willed youth gullible and fall into the
company of drug users. In course of time, they become victims of drug addiction.
The use of drugs becomes a means of escape from feelings of void and helplessness.
Those initially attracted to the thrill of drugs soon become addicts and helplessly
dependent. They develop a sense of craving, heightened states of anxiety and
physical suffering.


--- PAGE 266 ---
246 Coimseiling and Guidance
The youlh is not altogether to be blamed for this state of affairs. In our fast
society, no one has the time even to lie down for a couple of days if feeling unwell.
One has to keep going. The pharmaceutical companies dish out several kinds of
doubtful drugs and advertise their products aggressively and effectively through the
mass media. This makes several people resort to drugs. In fact, the present generation
may be called the drug-devouring generation. People want instant relief, and
therefore, swallow one pill or another. The young, observing the adults resorting to
phoney medicines for instant relief, follow suit This explains how youth arc turning
to drugs. Most adults find it difficult to get relief from their tensions and anxieties
through self-discipline. They find it easier to swallow pills, no matter even if the
relief they feel is only briefer temporary, hi this brave new world, we arc developing
an increasing inability to tolerate even small amounts of physical and emotional
discomfort Modem urbanized industrial societies look for painless life at the cost
of freedom. Incr^ing number of youth turn to drugs that provide a sense of thrill
by creaung feelings of upness'.
Two coteprios of drags arc commonly used; they are tranquiUzers and sedaUves.The downs are sedatives. The foimer arc 'ups'. They iniiease excitement. The
pmmonly used drugs are martjnana, heroin, brown sugar, L,S,D. and so on, whichWong to the ptegoiy of barbtutrates. On the other htid, amphetamines create the
provide the kind of experiences forwhtch the youth ctave. Many produce severe emoUonal andTyctor,Sietions.
in all kinds of crimes leading the entire societv to tS"«'necessary that effective steps are taken to prevent dmrr ° delinquency. Itaddicts away from their use. ubuse and to wean the drug
Modem youth live in an age of accelerated
upheaval, famUy discord and religious turmoil J? °Sical advancement, socialfreedom and encouraged to become indeDendem ^ increasedonly undesirable but also dangerous. This freedom is not
regardingchild-rearingmethods.Muchoftheinf^"-^'^ misconceptionsand sometimes even inimical because it is iiw purveyed is confradictory
best type of child-rearing technique leads concerning the
and inadequacy. For example, we are told that ^ uncertainty, helplessnessWe are also told that too much discipline kill the rod is to spoil the child.developmenL Thus the problem of balance bet affects the personality
been solved Too much permissiveness is ^'^^dom and restriction has notadults are unsure of themselves as to how far ih many restrictions. Thefreedom or restricting it. ChUdren under suSf^ ^inconsistent pattern of adult behaviour Th ^'^"'"stances grow up with an
excitement-seeking behaviour. For various encourages deviant,religion has lost ground to technology especially political, organizedsuspiciously and is charged with being'retmS' ""fortunately, is looked upon
modem needs, attitudes and values. Consea P"®®(introspection) or outward to the society, men turn inward
upward (to higher forces). The loss of imnort ®e® ihe need to turnPonance of symbols, authority and


--- PAGE 267 ---
Special Areas In Counselling 247
established conventions and traditions to serve as guidelines appear to have
abandoned the youth to arbitrary modes of behaviour, which by and large are
inconsistent and often irrational. The young today fmd themselves living in a void
without personal involvement and a sense of belonging. Drugs come to fill the
vacuum and become a means to gain a sense of belonging, to escape from the sense
of alienation. A number of young people are becoming so excited with speed that
they seek drugs which provide them 'kick*. Some drugs lead to hallucinations and
paranoid states. In some cases they even produce a disorientation of time and place
and cause amnesia as the effect of the drug wears off. Continued use of drugs may
produce permanent brain damage and serious personality changes.
The dynamics of drug addiction are complex and not fully understood. However,
a number of socio-cultural and psychological factors have been emphasized. The
personality traits of addicts suggest impulsiveness, rebelliousness, dependency, etc.
As a group they are characterized by low frustration tolerance, inability to endure
tension and exhibiting feelings of inadequacy and self-devaluation. Many addicts
are immature and dependent individuals who have unrealistic levels of aspirations
and are unable to face failures. And thus they begin using drugs for alleviation of
insecurities, anxieties and tensions.
Treatment on a psychological level involves personality assessment which focuses
on the individual's present mental state and on the role of personality and emotional
stress in the development of the disorder. The assessment procedures involve
interviews and use of psychological tests. Information regarding marital, occupational
and other data concerning the individual's life situations is obtained from family
and other sources and the total picture obtained is used as a basis for understanding
and providing appropriate treatment of the disorder. Treatment may involve medical,
psychological and sociological procedures. Medical procedures include drug therapy.
Although it is effective in alleviating some neurotic and psychotic reactions, it does
not lead to resolution of inner conflicts or personality ^ange. Therefore, there is
often a relapse when treatment is withdrawn. Psychological treatment aims at
alleviating the individual's maladjusted behaviour and strives to bring about
personality change to fost^ more effective adjustment Psychological treatment
falls under three categories:
1. Supportive psychotherapy aims at helping the individual feel more adequate
to face his problems confidently.
2. Behaviour modification aims at modifying the individual's maladaptive
behaviour through substitution of more effective coping techniques.
3. Re-educative psychotherapy helps gain an insight into oneself such that one
is able to modify and/or change faulty assumptions and attitudes, paving the
way for fundamental changes in personality organization. It would also be
necessary to deal with the individual's social environment and his/her
adjustment to it. Conditions of stress in the individual's life sihiations that
interfere with his adjusunent should also be modified. In most cases, changes
in family situation help make rnbre effective adjustment possible.
An effective programme of treatment should include medical, psychological and
sociological approaches. Psychological preventive measures need attention in public


--- PAGE 268 ---
248 Counselling and Guidance
education, concerning the detection and correction of pathological tendencies at the
earliest stage. Rehabilitation of the weaned drug addicts is of vital importance.
Psychological and sociological measures have to play an important role in this
regard.
SUMMARY
Family group consultation Is counselling wldi families In small groups. The
counsellor initially meets the families Individually and later brings them together
for family group consultations. The families are Introduced to one another by the
counsellor. Usually die femllles meet for 8 to 12 sessions and profit Irom dlscusslrig
each others' problems and flnding solutions to them.
Several adult members who are required to pl^ the role of parents sometimes
experience some difficulty. They are often Inexperienced and uninformed.
Counselling with parents Is an Important area. llMost parents fall to understand
OTd appreciate the limitations and difficulties of their children. This leads to
dl^ppolntment on their part and emotional tensions which are not conducive toa harmor^lous family life. Parents should be helped to become more sensldve to
'  desirable Insights Into such problems,
jra tension can be reduced If delinquency Is understood andtr^t^. Counselling delinquents isaveiy important remedial programme through
whl^ tensions can be appreciably reduced.problems generally tend to be reticent. Th^ are usually
Into M ° assistance from others. Counselling the reluctant client Is another
to aw^t his of which Is to reach out to the client and not
counselling does not have much relevance In most traditional
becominer modernization and westernization. It Is
value. obvious that pre-mailtal counselling could be of much
un^re^dtio I? step In the individual's life. It involves ^pathedcmu^ Of each other's dlfBcultles and probl^ andcouDlescoiiiHhoi''^" attitudes of the Individuals concerned. Counselling
Inculcate In them Insight Into each ottier's personalities and
commitment and resL'lShiii^' accommodation and a sense ofharmony Into the dlscS?i counselling Is aimed at bringingDlsadvant^ed grouSta Individuals.;minorities, require helo^TlfS®^' ^ religiousdependent. ^wnselllng could make the groups self-reliant and self-
thro^tlS ^


--- PAGE 269 ---
12
'vMusitioini of CoMmsmMln
INTRODUCnON
Evaluation is the assessment of the relative effectiveness with which goals or
objectives are attained in relation to specified standards. It is an important step in
the implementation of any programme and has several goals to fiilfil. Firstly, through
a systematic and dependable evaluation, the appropriateness of the programme can
be judged. Secondly, it can help locate the weaknesses or limitations of the
programme, if any, such that suitable remedial steps can be taken to correct the
shortcomings well in time. Thirdly, it can help discover effective measures to
improve the programme. Fourthly, it can indicate to the subjects the nature of
progress made and help motivate them towards more effective results. Fifthly, it
can help the administration or management to make the necessary personnel and
material resources available to the programme to improve its effectiveness. Lastly,
evaluation can be an effective means of demonstrating to the society or county at
large, the meaningfulness as well' as the utiliQ' of the programme.
Counselling is concerned with effecting desirable changes in client behaviour
and experience. The counsellor may choose whatever theoretical orientation he
wishes but he is ultimately concerned with client improvement
The effectiveness of counselling can be evaluated by determining to what extent
the counselling goals have been achieved through a programme of counselling.
According to Shertzer and Stone (1968), the aim of evaluation is to ascertain the
current status of the counselling service within some frame of reference and on the
basis of this knowledge, to improve its quality and efficacy. Evaluation is thus
concerned with an assessment of the outcomes of counselling. Are the results real
or imaginary? Are they permanent or temporary? Are they objective or subjective?
If counselling has been effective, the results must be demonstrable. We may explain
this with the help of an analogy. For example, a class of students should profit from
a teacher's lessons. But if the class does not show any obvious change after being
taught, it is either construed that the teacher has failed or viewed that the pupils
lack motivation. Similarly, when a physician treats his patient it is expected that the
condition of the patient will improve. If the patient does not improve it could mean
that either the physician or the system of therapy used by him has failed. Or it could
even imply that the patient was beyond improvement In counselling we face a
similar situation. When the client does not experience the desirable change, must
it be inferred that either the counsellor or the process of counselling has failed? Or
should it be interpreted that the client was not amenable to the desirable change?


--- PAGE 270 ---
250
pragnrnme " f" 1^1 matter in any;
«OM£MSOFEVAMWI,on
Evaluation is not only an imn~^
nature Programme. Different
programme, for instance.!^ ®^aliiated for not easy to evaluate,participation of ihecommiT° -'®®^^'"ated in tpm, techniques. A health,or even the amount of mon ^ P^gramme th criteria. Thesome of the criteria. In this fn "" imniemt •''' community
programme evaluated on tha niost of ihp « • "^^^n of the programme are
Counselling outcomes an» 'he acceni*»rf ^ ^ ®®' "P n"''suitable criteria po^ f «> easilyof the problems inherent ft ^^^na^ion- The question of
The rlr.!.* Objective. . ^"nsellmg outcomes.
i B= n,?,™»'= Wift toping an client to set
™5-Sg"yS?r i^iofeon "' = ^°^-to.i"nisnotgcSte'::^ ->= dent a feeling4. S or^r i?'®criteS^^^^^^ in this sense. 1dynamic.
5. Onro'f^e^ft?^°"'^'herS-^^ ^status of the '®quisite' ^®nies a Z changes in all I
Qnl ot?' f ^vaie^on 7. task. .meaningful evai . Pm-cmin ^nmparicrt 'b® pre-counselli5. It is sometimes ^P^cUc^m""® counselliimeans that a thh^'"^ thai " available, thus maldi
~rc~S55; KSS:;- SJSSSalso personnel ''.'lonr °°' '
'' "ay °ot only monelary 1"easible to find funds it '


--- PAGE 271 ---
Evaluation of Counselling 251
comparatively difficult to find trained personnel who are well versed with
the techniques of evaluation.
Evaluation, even if concerned with validation, is always with reference to a set
of criteria. The choice of appropriate criteria has been an unsurmountable problem.
In a strict logical sense any criterion has certain built-in Umitadons. These limitadons
would nauirally affect evaluadon. The counselling outcomes can be evaluated in
terms of (1) subjecdve criterion, namely, client sadsfacdon or experience, (2)
counsellor judgement or (3) objecdve criterion, which is independent of both the
counsellor and the client. An independent criterion could be defined as the judgement
of the community. Assessment by a device like a psychological test could also be
used as an objecdve criterion.
Subjecdve criterion, on the face of it, is the most relevant criterion for evaluating
the counselling outcomes. Who else but the client could best judge whether or not
he has profited or improved from counselling? However, a closer examinadon
shows the limitadons of this subjecdve criterion. It is a universally acclaimed fact
that the individual is not the best judge of himself. More often than not, the individual
beleives that 'he knows', but in actuality he is ignorant of himself. Freud's
'unconscious* amply demonstrates this position. It could, therefore, be argued that
the individual can never be the best judge of himself. His responses could be
merely imaginary or at best be auto-suggestions. Th^ is also a false sense of well-
being experienced by patients in physical therapy or clients in counselling*
Consequently, it is argued that the outcome of counselling needs to be evaluated
by some other criterion and not by the client himself.
The counsellor's judgement or appraisal of the client is suggested as a proper
criterion of counselling outcomes. It is argued that the counsellor is best suited to
judge because he alone has knowledge of the initial state of the client before
counselling and the present state of the client after counselling and he has the
necessary professional training to make the proper assessment This argument appears
to be reasonable on the analogy of the physician-padent relationship. The physician
is the best judge of his patient's progress and has the necessary clinical training and
experience. Hie counsellor, it is argued, stands in a similar relation to his client as
the physician to his patient. However, there are many instances in which physicians
as well as counsellors have gone wrong in their judgements. There is another
ticklish problem that comes into the picbire. No counsellor would normally accept
his failures because it would affect his professional status. Therefore, there is a sort
of compelling tendency for the counsellors to claim that their efforts have been
successful. The counselled' may claim success where there is none or exaggerate his
success out of all ]doportions. Naturally, there are serious res^ations about accepting
counsellor judgements as a dependable criterion.
The critics of the subjective criterion of the client judgement and the counsellor
judgement suggest an objective criterion to evaluate and validate counselling gain&
There are certain situations in which objective evaluation is not only practicable but
also the best means of evaluation. But this is not always possible in counselling*
For example, we cannot objectively test the dismissal of an obsession, for it is
purely a psycholo^cal phenomenon. Reports from family members and/or frien^regarding their judgement of a change in behaviour and measures of changes in
I'}; 1,


--- PAGE 272 ---
(f
252 CdunselHngand Culdarxe
selected overt behaviour may be useful in evaluating client progress. However,
certain things such as the client's feelings of inferiority or of tension cannot be
objectively assessed, though to some extent psychological tests could be used to
assay the client's status. The validity of few psychological tests has been established
beyond doubt No psychological lest is valid for all times, for all situations and for
all persons^ The v^dity of every psychological test is specific to the situation for
which it is designed and specific to the class or category of subjects for whom or
with whom it is designed. Therefore, the evaluation of counselling outcomes on the
basis of psychological tests has obvious limitations.
APPROACHES TO EVALUATION
There may be different approaches to the evaluation of counselling outcomes. All
approaches must satisfy three requisites, namely (1) the objectives or goals should
be stated in operaUonal terms such that they can be observed and objecrivelyassessed, (2) the methods sought to be used to assess the objectives must have
demonstrable vahdity and (3) the procedures employed in evaluaUon must be reliable.
In short, any apprwch to evaluaUon should saUsfy the preliminary requirements ofobjectivity, reliabihty and validity.
Survey Approach
The counsemng outcomes can evaluated by employing the survey approach. Thesurvey approach is simple aud is commonly employed in several dlLolines Itconsists of Identifying the poputeUon and obtaining a representative 4nple ftothit, collecting mformauon or evidence from the subier»« in .»,« . ,
asuitableevaluaUvescheduleandmaJdngjudgementsintpmic ®criteria. In this approach the clients could ^about the effectiveness or usefulness of counselling whether thev tJmwprofited from it, what flaws they have observed, what su^a^ ^^5 fflrfor improvement and so on. InformaUoncould be useful to assess, in broad terms, ® ofcounselling. One of the pracUcal problems of the snnZll u ZavailabiUty of subjects for quesUoning. The other m ^PP^p^ch is the non-
issues, such as the unreli^iUty of subjects' answer^ !°subjects to give socially desirable responses and the lie <5riri
of this approach are the lack of experimental validatin drawbacksbiased conclusions and difficulUes in inferring SnshlpT^''
Case Study Approach
The obvious advantage of this approach lies in the inHowever,- from the methodological point of vi^ ^ ^
/which is an individual approach) as contrasted with ^ ^ idiographic approachis generally considered the scienUfic approach) "o^^oi^ieUc approach (whichIbe case study approach is designed to study th^ in^- ,y the individual and assess the


--- PAGE 273 ---
Evaluation of Counselling 253
changes that take place in him as a result of his exposure to counselling. The
advantage of tliis approach lies in its emphasis on the individual and his growth.
It is considered to be a more reliable approach. The drawback of this approach is
that, by its very nature, it is a time-consuming method. Also, since each individual
is unique, gencralizadons from individual data are open to serious limitations. The
massing of data pertaining to different individuals may obliterate the unique features
of the individual approach.
However, evaluation has to be made by either using the subjective criterion,
namely, the client's judgements regarding his own progress or improvement, or the
counsellor's judgement of the client's progress or improvemenL We have already
alluded to the limitations of both the criteria.
1
Experimental Approach
The experimental approach in the counselling situation is fraught with serious
problems, for an experiment involves controls. In the counselling situation control
is very difficult. However, in a limited sense the experimental approach could be
employed to evaluate the counselling outcomes. The basic requirements of this
approach are: (1) determining the objectives, (2) choosing appropriate methods, (3)
selecting two or more groups of subjects who are comparable with one another, (4)
applying counselling techniques which could be measured or scaled and (5)
measuring or assessing the fmal outcomes. The vital step in this approach is the
study of two or more comparable groups. This is a tall order, for with all the.
ingenuity at our disposal it would not be possible for us to assemble groups of
subjects who are comparable with one another to control several variables such that
the independent variable of the counselling process could be related to the outcome
of it (dependent variable).
The evaluation of counselling outconies differs from one area to another, as for
example, the evaluation of counselling outcomes in the scholastic field would differ
from that in the field of vocational choice or vocational adjustment or job satisfacdon
and so on. Depending on the field in which counselling is employed, the criteria
for evaluation have to be determined. For example, in the field of educadon a
problem that is commonly encountered is one of study skills. Counselling in this
area has specific goals like improving comprehension, vocabulary, speed of reading,
memory, etc. Criteria concerning the specific problems, as above, can easily be
defined with a certain amount of objecdvity. The evaluation of a pupil's progress
in learning could be assessed on the basis of such objectively defined criteria as the
number of items recalled or marks obtained and the like.
In the field of vocational choice the problem of evaluation is not so simple
because vocational choice has several repercussions. Client satisfaction depends on
several aspects of occupational life.
In the area of personal counselling, the problem of evaluation assumes more
serious dimensions of a problematic nature than the ones considered in educational
and vocational counselling.


--- PAGE 274 ---
254 Counsdltng and Guidance
PROBUM OF MEASURING CHANGE
Of the several problems the one that stands out as the most significant is the
problem of measuring change. In counselling the objective is to bring about
personality change through personality development This phenomenon of change,
or more specifically, personality change, is not comparable to a physical condition
or state or thing, ^en one is concerned with a non-physical phenomenon, or more
sp^ifically, with a process, measurement is not easy. It assumes greater difficulty
if the rate of change is not uniform. And in counselling we cannot conceive of a
uniform rate of change. Therefore, measurement is extremely difficult. The pre-
counselling and post-counselling states of the client are not easily amenable to
objective evaluation. The same psychological instruments cannot be administered
successively to the client for obvious reasons, such as familiarity, knowledge of
content, memory, etc.
The value or usefulness of counselling and psychotherapy has been disputed. In
a shidy published in 1952, Eysenck made a surprising finding that a group of
patients who did not receive any psychotherapy were none the worse as compared
to a comparable group of patients who received some kind of psychotherapy. At the
end of a certain period of time it was found that those who did not receive any
therapeutic a^istance made startling recoveries and a proportion of such recoveries
was not owing to any chance fxtors. According to Eysenck (1952), "roughly two-
thirds of a group of neurotic patients will recover or improve to a marked extent
within about two years of the onset of their illness, whether they are treated by
means of psychotherapy or not". Levitt's (1957) findings with children tended to
cc^cur with that of Eysenck's. Patients and clients do get better if left to themselves.
It may be argued that if clients get better with time there is no sensible purpose in
investing heavily in time, resources and personnel to provide counselling services.
USEFULNESS OF COUNSELLING
The foregoing unmistakably points to the need for demonstrating beyond all doubt
the validity of counselling. Counsellors have to demonstrate the utility of their
services to the community. We mentioned Eysenck's s&idy that tends to discount
the claims of psychotherapy. Eysenck stated the views of such therapists as Glover,
Mowrer and Malan among others who hold that there is no conclusive evidence to
substantiate the claims of the usefulness of psychotherapy. Bixler (1963) too questions
the claims of counselling efficacy. He holds that routine care will improve the
condition of the client to the same extent as does counselling. But Rosenzweig
(1954) criticizes the validity of Eysenck's investigation and his conclusion. He
holds that the criteria of therapeutic success employed by Eysenck differed from
the criteria used by the different therapies. Gonyea (1963) reported negative
relatimiship between the ideal therapeutic relationship and the client's judgement of
his own Improvement. Strupp (1963) appears to be more practic^ in that he
acknowledges the difficulties of measuring the success or outcome of counselling.
Responding to Strupp's (1963) report Eysenck (1964) reiterated his earlier views


--- PAGE 275 ---
EvaJuatSon of Counselling 255
published in 1952. Silverman (1962) considers psychotherapy as an attempt to
teach the individual to develop more constructive concepts of himself. The word
'cure' has unfortunately been used in the counselling context Here it actually
means that the client fmds some relief from his current difficulties.Understood in
this sense, a 'cure' cannot be permanent If this criterion is accepted counselling
outcomes become more meaningful.
The most provocative statement about the effectiveness of client-centered
counselling was made by Rogers (1951). "The careful evaluation of the research
fmdings enables us to draw certain conclusions such as these: That profound changes
occur in the perceived self of the client during and alter therapy; that there is
construcdve change in the client's personally characteristics and personality struchire;
changes which bring him closer to the personality characteristics of the well
funcdoning person; that there is a change in direcdons defmed as personal integradon
and adjustment; that there are changes in the maturity of the client's behaviour as
observed by friends".
Edgar (1966) outlines four assumpdons underlying counselling research: (1)
counselling is lawful and orderly, (2) a cause-and-effect relationship exists within
counselling, (3) the counselling relationship is only a part of the client's experi^ce
in life, and (4) predicted outcomes of counselling can be veritied by conceivable
operations.
Rogers (1961) stressed that change occurs during therapy and it can be measured.
Hie Willoughby Emotional Maturity Scale was employed to measure the observable
change. Rogers contends, "The ove^ conclusions appear justified that where client-
centered therapy is judged to be successful, an observable change in the direction
of maturity of behaviour takes place in the client. Where therapy is judged not to
have occurred in significant degree some deterioration of behaviour is observed".
Notwithstanding the problems such as the ones alluded to in the previous section,
counselling has come to stay and this is proof enough of its utility. But this should
not lead to a complacent attitude. What appears important is the need for empirical
studies in this field. They could be made along two directions,- namely, 'process
research' in which the focus is upon what takes place in counselling and 'outcome
research' which evaluates the results or the final product of cotinselling.
The client-centred q^proach primarily focusses on the counselling process. It
does not concern itself with outcomes, apart fiom the changes that take plaee in the
individual client who is able to experience his self and progressively overcome the
not-self. If the client is able to experience the not-self, that is, widen the self to
include the not-self the client has improved. He is progressing towards self-
actualization which becomes possible when he is able to act as a fully-functioniiig
personality. Rogers and his student Dymond (1954) have made sever^ evaluations
of client-centred therapy. Using pre- and post-therapy states and the clients as their
own control group they found that the client's every-day behaviour does change
and this change is in the desirable direction. They employed the Willoughby
Emotional Maturity Scale to measure behavioural change. The conclusions of this
study were based on the client's self-ratings obtained at four stages, namely (1) pre-
wait stage six months prior to the commencement of counselling, (2) pre-therapy,
(3) during therapy and (4) six months after the conclusion of therapy. Rogers stated


--- PAGE 276 ---
7'^ CoimselUng and Guidance
that there were significant changes in the client's behaviour and there was a
significant increase in maturity in the day-to-day behaviour of the client. This
finding suggests that the client-centred therapy was successful to the extent that
there was an increase in the maiurity of behaviour as judged by the client himself
and by his peers. Dymond (1954) made a simUar study using the same design and
described the results employing the Q-sort technique. The Q-sorts revealed that the
adjustment scores of clients were significantly higher than their initial scores (scores
before the therapy began). A number of criticisms were levelled against Rogers'
experimental design (own control design). Frank (1958), for example, was an
outspoken critic of this approach. Other evaluative studies have been made by
investigators like Cartwright, Kirtner and Fiske (1963). They reported a measurable
change in the subjects' evaluation of themselves. The client tended to be generally
less critical and more acceptant of themselves after therapy. They also judged
themselves to be more adequate. When specific personality changes were investigated
the results obtained were not very significant. This suggests that counselling leads
to an all comprehensive and total change in the clients which on fragmentation for
examination ceases to be significant. Cartwright and Vogel (1960) enquired into the
interesting issue of the amount of change in the clients and they found that (1) there
was a significant change during therapy as assessed by the Q-sort adjustment score.
(2) longer periods of therapy generally tended to be associated with more
improvement, (3) the subjects who had a long pre-wait improved more than the
spontaneous remission group and (4) the amount of change or improvement was
related to the amount of experience of the counsellor or therapist. Another study
was made by Snyder (1953) at the Pennsylvania State College employing instruments,
such as MMPI, Mooney Problem Check List, a client post-therapy scale and a
counsellor post-therapy rating scale. The significant outcome of the study was that
when phenomenological measures of change were used there was an obvious
indication of client change as a result of counselling. But when specific measures,
such as a measure of change in one trait or another were used to assess the counselling
outcomes the results appeared to be somewhat disappointing.
It is now evident that more research studies need to be made employing relevant
experimental designs, instruments and criteria. It is desirable that counsellors invest
more time and energy in research and help improve counselling techniques.
CRITEItIA FOR EVALUATION
Jensen, Coles and Nestor (1955) define a criterion as "a behaviour or a condition
which is or can be described in terms of an ideal and which is a goal". The
counselling process is studied against this criterion. The common goals which the
counsellors try to accomplish are improved adjusunent, a sensible vocational choice,
a realistic self-concept, behavioural change, etc. But all counsellors do not accept
these criteria.
A good criterion must, firstly, be relevant to the problem which has ben posed
for the study, and secondly, it must be measurable. These two attributes must be
considered in the selection of a criterion. We shall discuss some of the criteria
employed in counselling research.


--- PAGE 277 ---
■1
Evaluation of Counselling 2S7
Internal vs External Criteria
There arc two types of criteria based upon data obtained from within and data
obtained from outside the counselling setting.
Internal criteria include (1) the content of the client's communications and
indications of improvement of the client and (2) the counsellor's judgement of the
client's status (improvement).
Internal criteria have the advantage of being directly observable by the client
and the counsellor.
External criteria include client changes which are not subjective and hence are
objective.
Objective vs Subjective Criteria
Objective criteria are quantifiable and do not depend on the judgement of someone
connected with the counselling process. Examples of objective criteria are grades
in school, job tenure, job ratings by supervisors and so on.
Most of the counsellors consider objective criteria as superficial. This perhaps
led to the increased use of subjective criteria. Subjective criteria rely on the judgement
of either the counsellor or the client to determine if the client has attained something
of value through counselling. The client's report of satisfaction with counselling is
the most commonly employed and controversial subjective criterion. Another
subjective criterion is the self-report of the client regarding his degree of personal
adjustment and self-concept.
Reports from family members and friends could also help evaluate counselling
gains. But these are open to errors of subjective assessment and biases. Also, the
measurement of change in selected overt behaviour can be of value in evaluating
limited counselling outcomes.
Lewis (1970) suggests that the combining of several criteria into multiple measures
can lead to the enhancement or improvement of counselling evaluation.
CONTROL OF EXTRANEOUS VARIANCE
The use of control groups is essential in research studies. The evaluation of the
effectiveness of counselling must be made on the basis of individuals essentially
interested in seeking counselling. The effectiveness of counselling can be
demonstrated by providing counselling to some persons who seek counselling
assistance and denying it to others who are equally keen to receive it, then keeping
the latter (the control group) wailing for a period of time (pre-wait) and finally
comparing the two groups for measuring change, using relevant criteria.
In order to maintain the group as a 'tme' control, its members should be
engaged in some activity which is apparently, but not actually, counselling. Patterson
(1964) suggests that what is considered a placebo in counselling may actually be
the specific remedy. Much of counselling gain can be dismissed as simply imaginary
and a demonstration of the placebo effect. A placebo, owiiig to its indistinguishability
from the real drug, sets up an expectation of relief in the patient/client Religious


--- PAGE 278 ---
w
258 Q)un5eJ//;^and Guidance
healers and others, including counsellors, could unintentionally be essentially se
up a placebo effect. For this reason Bixler (1963) demands that "the therapist mdemonstrate that his treaunent is better than doing nothing at all".
STUDIES Of COUNSELLING EFFECTIVENESS IN EDUCATIONAL SETTINGS
It is quite evident from studies that individuals do benefit from counselling, bulwhen viewed as a whole, the evidence is not impressive.
Counselling whh Elementary School Chfldren
The effect of coimselliiig on fourth-grade students was assessed by Kianzler (196®, and his associates. They beiieved that the close personal reiaUonships provWf »students ^signed to coimseliing would result In a slgnlflcantly greater gat" "sociometiic status. The resuhs of the study revealed that the difference between th®
connselM and control groups were significant and that the relaUve percentaB®subjects who had mcr^ or decreased In soclomelric stahis In the two
rZlc 1^0 r"' ^'8"^ •» S-ilance by teachers declined a>sociometnc status dunng the same period
WIscoiHin Soconrbry School Coonsening Shrdy
Rothney (1958) made a series Of Studies pnnrviwv.- . .^citing.experimental groi^ which received exien« ^ of counsehad better academic records made and gin.dance sdissatisfied with their high school vocational choices.
employment, participated in self-improvLenr* P^°^®®Lourabl®attitude towards counselling and were mn^ ®to subjects who did not receive any ir ^The Somerville Project was begun in w?®
with dehnquenis. A sample of 325 bov .' concerning individual ' oth®''325 boys comprised the control trroun treatment group and ^treated were reported to have profited f ^ subjects j«canl
improvement with the remaining subiert?u^""^"^8. There was no sig** yipgwas effective in reducing deUnquencv "0 P^'oof
Hie results of a nine-year study of 170 ,renot encouraging. The foUow-un cL" „,'^,yashingion school children m
St. Louis also did not yield results L -r the Child Guidance
^ WicanUy different from the above.
MU«.es<«.CoD.g.Sh.dn«Co™«„,„^Williamson and Bordin (19401 atf-n,services provided at the Student effectiveness of
1. The counselled student*! bureau, University of Mi""® ,^e. rated sig„if2. TTiecounseU^ students eam^ni • mpx
studen,s-2.18 to 1.97 better grades than non-coonse«(on a fodr-point scale). -


--- PAGE 279 ---
Evaluation ofCounselling 259
Twenty-five years later Campbell (1965) compared the same two groups. The
differences between the two groups were slight but the counselled group repcMted
higher incomes and made greater contributions to society. No difference was found
between the groups on measures of anxiety and self-confidence.
On reviewing the above studies Lewis (1970) arrived at the following conclusions:
1. The effectiveness of counselling stated in general and vague terms is not
researchable. It has not been and probably can never be fumly proved.
2. Motivated clients usually benefit ffom counselling, no matter what criterion
is employed. It is likely that motivation plays an important role—but then
it is difficult to conceive of counselling with an unmotivated client anyway.
3. The effectiveness of counselling can be more easily demonstrated with the
use of objective, but perfiaps superficial, criteria. For example, counselling
with college students clearly helps improve their grades and their probability
of graduation. These could of course have been influenced by other factors
outside the counselling situation.
4. No theoretical appro^h to counselling has been proved sup^or to others.
SUMMARY
Evaluation Is Important for determlrrfng whether counselling goals have been
achieved as a result of tiie Implementation of. the counselling programme. In a
way It Is a method of validating counselling. While the need for evaluation
cannot be overemphasized. It poses serious problems which are not ea^ to
dicumvent. One of the problems Is the problem of devising meaningful criteria.
It Is not easy to Identity valid alteila. In the absence of suitable criteria evaluation
becomes Impractical. The related problem Is: Who should evaluate—the
counsellee, the counsellor or an outside agency? There are arguments for and
against accepting any of them as evaluating Judges.
Notwithstanding all the difficulties and practical problems we cannot do
away with evaluation. It Is essential In all sclentlflc endeavours. It Is hoped that
In future a sufficiently large number of research studies will be undertaken to
obtain objective data for the evaluation of counselling outcomes.
1
.-jl


--- PAGE 280 ---
-f
13
o
sind Tmmlng f@T
ComsellmM
INTRODUCTION
Counselling is a profepional fleld and Uke any olher profession it has to payattenuon to such vital matters as the seleriinn ^r,A P . '
Counselling is in an unenviable state in India Not nniv ■ ° "If tood
with any specificity but it is also used to rfpn X ihe term not understoodby indi^drs in dkmnt iS^wirSnVkr' f wSSno training. There is no legislaUon compamSrtSmedicine, law. or accountancy. Added to this fiir> • professions hklike the Indian Medical Association or the Bar organizauonprofessional allegiance and demand observance a(c « ^°""II?Llstandards. certain professional and ethical
In India, owing to such incapacitating factors«« ,
and appalling levels of illiteracy, the servir- o^f-population, grinding poveiV
is not because their importance is not undp t been neglected. Thisits meagre resources, neglects the service because the State, owing WEven after the secondary school com • Professions,
vocationalization of education to check bad recommended th®
guidance was not adequately provided to the ® unemployment in India»courses. Hence counselling did not reach e'th ^ choose appropriate
It cannot be overemphasized that counseir ^ collegiate level,of our colleges and universities. There are ^ ^®
becoming imperative, for example, in Oie avenues where counselling iseducation and nutrition. ' "®'^ of population education, health
For making the counsellors professionally comn..
have to be evolved and implemented F ?P^'®"^suitabletraining programmes
proficiency and quality of the service profer" maintain the competency.and enforced. Every profession must have bave to be spelled out
Such an ethical code has to be evolved ant of conduct for its members.
certification procedures. We could foUowsnm ""Pi®memed through licensing andin advanced countries like the USA or the^° Principles found to be helpfoi


--- PAGE 281 ---
Professional Preparation and Training for Counselling 261
COUNSELLOR PREPARATION AND PROFESSIONAL ISSUES
The nature of preparation for an individual to satisfactorily perform any job will
obviously depend on the nature of the job. Job analysis usually helps in understanding
the job requirements. If the job is simple and requires the performance of routine
activities, the training and preparation will be relatively simple and of shorter
duration. As the job l^omes more complex, the preparadon and training required
become correspondingly elaborate and lengthened. In professional areas, the entering
individuals are expected to funcdon at a higher level than technicians who are
elaborately trained to attend to roudne maintenance problems and funcdons. The
work of a professional individual is not roudne. It is often challenging, requiring
a considerable amount of inidative involving the funcdons of analysis, synthesis,
evaluaUon and cridcal appraisal. So at any dme a given amount of preparadon can
never be complete and final. The individual professional worker, therefore, has to
constantly up-date his knowledge and skills. He could be called upon to deal with
novel siluadons which his specific training may not have equipped him for. He has
to be ingenious and creadve in his outlook. He has to generalize from his experience
to take responsible decisions.
Society is being increasingly operated in ways designed to maximize control,
predictability and flexible adjustment to changing condidons. An important
consequence for counselling is the growing demand for the early selecdon and
training of personnel. There is more need to help people deal with the increasing
complexity of modern living and the consequent frustradons. The social complexity
and rapid rate of social change increase the need for raising the level of competence
in counselling.
During the last two decades, there has been a trend to define every kind of
failure as mental illness. Such disparate behaviour and outcomes as, learning blocks,
under-achievement, school phobias, and delinquency have been uncritically assumed
to be deviations from the norm requiring specialized attention and treatment. Szasz
(1964) has criticized the mental health approach based on an over-generalized
medical model of illness to problems which are essentially educational or vocational.
ACADEMIC PREPARATION
What should a counsellor know? The counsellors functions are not clearly defined.
There is no clearly understood and widely accepted role description of the counsellor.
Some educated people even do not know who a counsellor is or what he doesl
It would do well to state at the outset the goals and objectives of counselling.
This will help to define the areas of counsellor education and counsellor training.
Here it will be useful to distinguish 'education' from 'training'. In some quarters
there is a certain amount of displeasure in the use of the term 'counsellor training*.
It is argued that 'counsellor education' would be a better concept. A well educated
person may not necessarily be efficient in professional skills and practices. Counsellor
education refers to the academic training and broad-based knowledge and
understanding concerning the nature of human development, motivation, learning.
--Hi
y  imMiii


--- PAGE 282 ---
162 Counsellingand Guidance
personality and the like. It also includes a thorough understanding and appreciation
of the philosophy and the principles of counselling and other useful and essential
information. Counselling, like other scientific disciplines, comprises a body of
tested knowledge, theories, postulates and assumptions. The potential counsellor
would have to necessarily equip himself with this knowledge so as to gain critical
insights through understanding, analysis, synthesis and evaluation.
PRACTICAL SKILLS
CorniseUing, besides the above, consists of a body of ptactices and skiUs concerning
the seyeinl counselling processes, for instance, interviewing, case taking, choosingand adtntntstetrng tests, tnterprenng test resnlts, etc. The skills cannot te mastered
by mere tntehectual leamtng and dtdacdc nnderstanding What is vital is the^msthon of the skills of emi«thhdng, diagnosing, resolving conffictsf^gs, tdeas, content, and a host of other snbtle and sens4 skills, ibis constitnti
and"°^SirT;®rt^^it:S^^,1~^^ prepamtloncounsellor service. It is sometimes argued that mn ^ the better is the
than acquired. This kind of thinking is based on are inborn rather
art and not a science. There is no gainsavin? th® f counselling is an
and a science. ^ ^ counselling is both an artIn any professional field it is being increasinalv .
be carefully selected. It is not sufficient to onlv t ^ entrants have to
factors or the professed interest in the service b h ®^count the intellectual
have shown that personality characteristics have ^ number of studies
effectiveness of counsellors-is said to depend on th significance. Further, theto achieve. No useful purpose is served by lisT '"ay be tryingwhich supposedly would characterize a suaes r ^ ^ personality traits
criterion would be for a counseUor to evince iiS? ?Q"nsellor. A more suitablebe sensidve to the situation around him and the i*" P«>Ple. He should
he should be sincere and genuine. the people and above all
The objecUves of counselling can be succincUy sta
1. To identify the problem areas or difficiti
and limitations. '""es of mdivlduals, their potentialitiesTrt nitcict nennle tn .. . .
.  - uiciruoicuuo"'-"^
2. To assist people to understand themtoi
fully as is practicable. ^'^es and their situaUonal factors as
3. To help develop the potentialities nf •
undemiapding to enable them take
full advantage of fheen^nmental.1 T« 4.-1., ui me environmciiw4
from
. To help mitigate suffering, reach ,deoWona and thna enable clients mgSf"' responsible
Counselling, like many fields ofprof • ^ self-actualized individuals.,m a number of disciplines. In the^r,^k. draws its principles of practice
y'iewdes Of the present century. Ih®


--- PAGE 283 ---
Professional Preparation andTialnlngfbrCounselHng 263
ebullient enthusiasm which marked the counselling movement tended to emphasize
the need for appropriate methods from a pragmatic standpoint, to the neglect of the
development of conceptual models which could form a sound theoretical basis for
practice. The counselling movement grew out of the vocational guidance movement
which explains why it did not have a clear theoretical bias. Therefore, it largely
tended to be technique oriented and was less concerned with theory building.
Attention was focuss^ on helping the client, without understanding the integrated
nature of the human organism and the dynamics of problem appraisal. The resolution
of the problem from a psychological point of view did not receive sufficirat attention.
This relatively unsophisticated approach to counselling has undergone several
decisive changes over the years leading to the emergence of counselling as a
professional service.
Individuals who are engaged in professional activities have to face three basic
issues concerning (1) the procedures of selection and the training of prospective
entrants, (2) academic preparation to reach a level of professional standing with
regard to the necessary knowledge and the understanding of the principles and
dynamics of human growth, motivation, adjustment and coping mechanisms and
(3) methods of analysis and synthesis and the appropriate application of the acquired
skills.
The first and foremost of the professional considerations, therefore, concerns
equipping prospective counsellors with the necessary skills and adequate knowledge.
With the progressive growth of knowledge and an increasing understanding of
natural phenomena, what is known and acclaimed as the latest is likely to become
obsolescent as soon as new knowledge and techniques are known. Professional
training and skills by their very nature arc in need of constant revision and updating.
This brings home the related issue, namely, the question of differential service
or different kinds of services to be provided to clients who differ in age, sex,
experience occupation, etc. Similarly, clients could differ with regard to the type
of problems they have and the kind of service they apparently require. Consideration
of these issues suggests that training should not be of an omnibus type. Perhaps
there could be different levels of training:
1. A basic or general type, of training.
2 Training for different specializations depending on the areas or groups or
' situations in which the trainees will be called upon to serve.
ETHICAL STANDARDS
The second problem concerns ethical behaviour which invariably accompanies thedevelopment of a profession. As Wrenn (1952) explains, a profession impUes
•profe^ional* relations with the members of the society and since the counseUingrelationship is a highly personal one, there is a danger of its abuse. It is true thatfew counsellors would deUberately misuse the counseUor-counsellee relationship.
But we cannot be complacent and content with speaking in general terms and about
some or most counsellors. A profession is greater and wider than most of its
members either taken individually or collectively. It is, therefore, essential that
1
■'i¥. y riUk. ^


--- PAGE 284 ---
264 Counsellingand Guidance
professional rules or ethics be laid out or spelled out in no ambiguous terms. This
will create public trust and confidence in the profession.
Though the distinction between ethical and unethical practice is undoubtedly
obvious, in actual practice, there are many complications and the reasons are not
far to seek. Life situations are complex and the causes of unethictd behaviour
naturally are varied and multiple. Schwebel (1955) explains unethical practice to
arise from (1) ignorance, (2) inadequate training and (3) self-interest. For example,
a physician may err in the treatment of his patiwit owing to his ignorance of the
nature of the ailment He may also fail owing to lack of proper training, "^e
consequences of the two situations may be serious in themselves, but if the physician
were to act out of some self-interest and withhold proper treatment, his behaviour
would be unethical and would warrant the harshest punishment. Similarly, a
counsellor may fail owing to his ignorance or lack of appropriate skills resulting
from inadequate training. He may also.act out of self-interesL This last instance
would be viewed as unethical behaviour. However, society cannot be at the mercy
of ignorant and ill-trained professionals. The public has to be protected against the
possible harm done by such persons. This is secured by a system of certification
or licensing. Individuals are granted professional status and permitted to enter the
'occupation' only when the training is adjudged to meet the standards laid down
and the prospective entrants qualify by passing the standards set for them.
Lewis (1970) slates that to determine whether or not a given behaviour is ethical,
a profession should first have general principles to guide its members in their day-
to-day professional activities. A statement of such principles is of utmost importance
and most professional bodies devote considerable attention to such vital issues. For
example, the Medical Council, the Bar Council and other such bodies have spelled
out rules of conduct for their members. Likewise, in the field of counselling,
professional organizations like the American Psychological Association (APA, 1968)
and the American Personnel Guidance Association (APGA, 1968) have each
published a code of ethics to which the members are required to conform (excerpts
of the professional code are presented in the appendix). The code provides guidelines
for the entrant into the professional field and he cannot claim ignorance as a
legitimate defense for his perversion or non-compliance. The codes of conduct
formulated by professional bodies can only be recommendatory and not mandatory.
For strict enforcement of the code of ethics, they should have legal force, that is,
they should be made statutory either1>y an Act of the Parliament or by an Act of
the State Legislature. The former is preferable to secure uniformity throughout the
country.
A code of ethics is not enough. The exigencies of practice may bring up many
dilemmas and delicate issues of implied ethical concern. There is need for arousing
the ethical sense in the professional practitioner. It should become a part of his
professional self-concept. In the field of counselling the counsellor has his primary
responsibility to his client This may sometimes clash with the interest of the
institution which employs the client or clash with the interests of the client's family
or thoes of another individual. Yet the counsellor's responsibility cannot be
compromised. His responsibility is to his client. The second is the counsellor's
responsibility to the society. For that matter, all citizens are responsible to the


--- PAGE 285 ---
Profissslonal Preparation and Training for Counselling Z65
society to which they belong and in a wider sense to humanity as a whole. As a
professional practitioner, the counsellor's responsibility is greater than the
responsibility of a non-professional individual. The professional person has to take
such action as would contribute to the welfare and commonweal of tbe society. The
counsellor has a responsibility to his profession. He should work for the progress
of his profession and strive at all times and in all situations to further its interests.
Next, the counsellor has a responsibility to himself as an individual, as a member
of his family and as a member of this community.
Usually the several responsibilities and most of the life situations are compatible
with one another. Occasionally there may arise situations in which the counsellor
is confronted with dilemmas and conflicting situations. In such situations the ethical
codes may not be of much value to the counsellor. He has to fall back upon his
'own sense of values' or value system, his self-concept and his sense of self-regard.
This would help him in arriving at and relying on his own judgement
The most important area of ethical concern in counselling is confidentiality. This
concerns the information shared by the client with the counsellor which may be
very sensitive in nature. Even a slighdy careless handling of the information may
prove not only to be quite embarrassing for the client but also positively harmful
to his interests. The ethical Codes of most helping professions include an unequivocal
statement regarding confidentiality. The American Psychological Association (1968)
observes, "safeguarding information about an individual that has been obtained by
a psychologist... is a primary obligation of the psychologist... information received
in confidence is revealed only after most careful deliberation and when there is
clear and imminent danger to an individual or to society and then only to appropriate
professional workers or public authorides."
Lewis (1970) lists the following relating to ethical practice:
1. It is unethical to discuss a client with other persons. While this is plausible,
what about consulting with another professional person? In so far as this is
done (as in a case conference) to help the counsellor deal with his clients
better, discussing information about a client with professional persons is not
unethical. There is the question of intention. If it is to help the client, there
is nothing unethical about the matter. However, if the intention is
questionable, then a discussion of the client's information borders on the
unethical.
2. Frequently councilors are approached for information by other persons
(parents, relatives, friends, etc.) and institutions (schools or employers).
Except in circumstances which clearly warrant such sharing of information,
the counsellor is not expected to divulge any part of it without first seeking
the client's unconditional permission. A counsellor should not violate the
principle of confidentiality, even if he were to believe that a discussion of
the client with his/her parent, teacher or boss as the case may be, would be
helpful in understanding the client better.
3. Should the counsellor give information to the government or to the
employers? Here again the counsellor is not bound to please them for any
reason and he has no business to violate the principle of confidentiality. His
first and foremost obligation is to the client.


--- PAGE 286 ---
266 Counsellingand CuldancB
However, the situation is different when the client is an applicant for a job and'
his prospective employer (government or a private institution) would want
information to conrider the client for employment. Eyen in this situation, the
counsellor is not obliged to divulge any information unless he is specifically permitted
by the client to give the necessary information to the prospective employers.
Frequently the counsellor may administer psychological tests to his client After
he is counselled, what should be done with the data? Who should have access to
the data? The client and the counsellor or some other person or agency? Once again
there is no room for ambiguity at all and any information including test data
obtained from the client in connection with counselling is to be treated as confidential
material and should not be transmitted to others without the client's express
permission. Test data are also often obtained in non-counselling contexts, such as
vocational guidance, educational guidance, etc. However, in such situations, testing
is not the direct responsibility of the counsellor and, therefore, must be treated
differently.
In counselling sessions the interview may be taped. Could such taped material
be used in training counsellors? Yes. if prior permission is obtained from clients for
uring the material in a harmless way for constructive purposes. If there is no
concurrence on the part of the concerned clients, it is specifically unethical to use
the tapes for any purpose whatsoever.
It should be emphasized that any infonnaiion obtained ffom the client by the
counsellor is a private communication and that it cannot be violated under any
circumstances or at any time without the specific permission of the client
Another very, important ethical issue concerns the competence of the counsellor
to provide the appropriate service. This is a very tricky question. Who outght to be
the judge? Once the counsellor obtains his certificate after training (and obtains his
licence or a certificate of practice where such regulation is statutory), he is firee to
accq>t any client. He himself is under an obligation to determine and judge whetho^
or not he can provide the necessary help and service to the client. The counsellor
may honestly ^lieve that he can, but it may be only his misconception. An outsider
caimot judge the matter. It is entirely for the counsellor to take the responsibility.
It should be specifically understood that the counsellor must make every effort to
correct any false impressions which the client may derive concerning his
qualificadons and competence. Ik should, if necessary, make a referral. Occasionally
a client may refuse to accept a referral (such situations are very common and
frequent in the field of medick practice). Should the counsellor continue to counsel
or should he terminate the relationship? It is necessary that the counsellor should
help the client make a realistic assessment of the situation and act in accordance
wiA his (counsellor's) professional advice. If this is not heeded, there appears to
be no alternative but to terminate the relationship.
hi considering the counsellor's functions in the counselling relationship, we
have focussed on the counsellor as a practitioner. A counsellor has also to be a
researcher and this poses certain subtle problems. Should the human subject be
treated as a guinea-pig? Can the counsellor delve into the innermost experiences of
human individt^ for purposes other than the amelioration of suffering? Sometimes
the purposes or objectives of specific research have to be kept away from the


--- PAGE 287 ---
Professional Prepamtlon and Training for Counselling 267
subjects. In such situations are we justified in keeping the subjects in the dark? Tbe
ethics of research is too complex and intricate an issue to be discussed in g^t
detail in the present context
LEGAL CONSIDERATIONS
Licensing and certification are used as the basis for legally controlling the practice
of several professional areas. In the USA, statutes are in force in most States to
ensure proper supervision through licensing and cerdfication. In India this has not
attracted the attention of either the central or the state governments. As a profession
reaches maturity, it becomes necessary that legally it be recognized through licensing
and certification. The major intention for such measures is to prevent pseudo-
practitioners from entering the freld. When statutes are made counsellors have to
be largely involved in the process of drafting them and no real purpose will be
served to treat them as mere legal matters.
The statutes should be broad-based and should involve almost all kinds and
types of counsellors—child,-school, vocational, parent, marital, etc.
SELECTION AND TRAINING OF COUNSELLORS
Counsellors vary in the quality of help they can provide. Those who are highly
competent and skilled are able to produce better results. Therefore, it is the primary
obligation of the profession to provide the expertise to produce desirable results in
the clients.
All professional fields attach considerable importance to the selection of suitable
persons to be trained to become members of a profession, for example, medicine,
engineering, etc. For proper criteria to be laid out it is necessary for the different
functions of counsellors to be identified. Primarily counselling is a helping function.
Therefore, it is closely related to the needs and characteristics of the social system
in which it is to function and operate, and also to the resources,—^personnel and
material—, available to the system. For exmple, counselling services are
comparatively highly developed in the USA. They are almost non-existent in India.
With rapid industrialization and urbanization, the traditional modes of functioning
and the charateristics of the Indian society are fast breaking down, necessitating the
increasing provision of counselling services. Demographic growth, income
distribution, educational access, etc., go to det^mine the nature of services required
by the society.
In the developing countries the following limitations have prevented and
sometimes distorted the development of counselling:
1. Lack of proper understanding of what counselling is, leading to confusion
and false expectations.
2. Lack of financial support owing to the general poverty of the developing
countries.
3a. Introduction of unrealistic models of functioning. For instance, imitaiion


--- PAGE 288 ---
268 Counsellingand Culdan^
and emulation of the kind of services available on the campuses of US
universities, such as student personnel services, by the Indian universities.
Such services are too expensive to be of value in the Indian context,
b. Emphasis on models of help unsuited to the milieu. For example, the average
Indian, or for that matter the Oriental, is largely conventional in his outlook,
while in the West, and more especially in USA, people are unconventional
and individualistic.
4. Lack of proper coordination between the available agencies of assistance
leading to wastefulness and duplication of effort.
5. Absence of educational and employment avenues to serve as the primary
source for counselling activi^.
6. Social and economic means of a large part of the population lying below the
poverty line, making counselling an unrealistic exercise.
Most social systems are committed to achieving human well-being. The leaders
of such systems recognize the need for counselling but do not give it the kind of
priority it deserves owing to lack of personnel and material resources.
CONCEPnON OF A PROPESSIONAL WORKER
Counselling in education is not an instrument for economic development but an
instrument for the development of human resources. Counsellors have to help
individuals think for themselves, make decisions for themselves, and if necessary,
reorient their lives. Therefore, counselling should never be narrowed down to
counselling for a job, it has to be counselling for life, a life prepared for facing
challenging changes. Thus counselling is an integral part of learning.
A pragmatic programme would mm at preparing professionals to function at
different levels and activities in counselling programmes. The competencies required
for counselling individixals would differ from those required for working with
groups. Counselling in community situations transcends the 'cubicle relationship*.
PREPARATION OF COUNSEUORS
A balanced and sound training programme should include:
1. Basic theoretical ineparation—^Understanding of motivation, psychodynamics
of human adjustment, learning of principles and other concepts that underlie
counselling.
2. Technical and applied knowledge—Knowledge of test use and interpretation,
interviewing skills and competencies in speciaSzed procedures of intervention.3. A broad-based practicum and training for enabling the counsellors to meet
any exigencies.
4. Practical training.
There is no finality with regard to training. But it can be stated without any
hesitatioii that the counsellor moat kaaw


--- PAGE 289 ---
Professional PrepamaonandTralnlngfyrComselllng 269
cultural background of the clients. The programme could comprise a four-semester
Master's course in counselling psychology, augmented by a year's professional
training programme.
Counsellors need to have sound knowledge and critical understanding of individual
differences and their significance. The improtance of the study of culture arises
from its impact on man's development of his unique personality through imbibing
the surrounding values and developing his own individual set of values. It is now
recognized that cultural di^erences have far-reaching effects on individual values
and personality development
The earlier medical model emphasized ^the importance of remediation. With a
greater appreciation of the significance of the cultural background and its influence
on human development, the limited concept of remediation is fast yielding place to
the perspective of developing positive values in the client.
IMPORTANT ISSUES
The coimseDor Prerequisites
Should counsellors have teaching experience? Some tend to think that teaching
experience is necessary since it is believed to provide useful insights. Further,
teaching experience is supposed to give a basic understanding and appreciation of
the role of teachers. Teaching experience is expected to provide counsellors with
opportunities and experiences to observe pupils in classroom situations and the
conditions that could facilitate or inhibit learning. These reasons suggest that teaching
experience is useful for counselling. However, some administrators believe that
teaching experience for a counsellor is unnecessary. It is argued that counselling
and teaching are different activities and that teaching experience can result in
undesirable attitudes like authoritarianism. It is suggested that by providing suitable
internship experience, the prospective counsellors could be helped to gain the
necessary understanding of the school environment, common pupil needs, parental
expectations, etc.
^Mcialists or General CoimseUors
Opinion is also sharply divided with regard to the question of whether the counsellor
should be a generalist or a specialist The advocates of the generalist role hold that
it is often necessary for a counsellor to perform a host of administrative functions.
In addition to the administrative duties, the counsellors may be often required to
coordinate the several services and find the necessary resources for their
implementation. As opposed to this view, it is vehemently argued that the counsellor
should be a specialist. It is held that the counsellor performs specific functions of
counselling at the professional level. It would be a sheer waste of his training, time
and energy, if he were to devote himself to non-counselling activities. Teachers can
perform many of the functions which counsellors usually do, thus enabling the
counsellor to devote his time and energy to counselling work. The specialist versus
generalist controversy is overlooked by a few people. But it cannot be over-


--- PAGE 290 ---
270 CounseilingandGiidance
emphasized thai the purpose of specialization is to provide expert service. The
genetalist is often found to take on the responsibilities usually discharged by the
teachers. In this context, the issue whether a school counsellor should be treated as
a technician or as a professional worker comes to the fore. It is held that the school
counsellor is no more than a technician on the ground that he is employed in the
schools essentially to assist teachers. Therefore, counselling is viewed as a subsidiary
function to be performed by personnel other than teachers. The view that the school
counsellor is essentially responsible for professional service is held on the ground
that the judgements he m^es concern the fundamental and vital issues of the
personalities of the pupils. Therefore, this kind of work which is of a complex
nature cannot be fit^ into the daily routine of the school.
A related question usually posed concerns the scope of the activities of school
counsellors, "^e idea that the preparation of school counsellors is mostly directed
towards educational and vocational decision-making activities is not justified.
Teachers, parents and the students themselves expect the school/college counsellor
to assist young men and women with their curricular, educational and vocational
planning. As against this view, it is often pointed out that most educational problems
involve emotional factors and it is unrealistic and dangerous to neglect the emotional
issues. In addition, those who apparently seek educational or vocational assistance
may actually need help in the area of personal adjustment also. Most competent
school teachers are seized with this problem of emotional blocks and take pains to
get them resolved.
The importance of the need for providing counselling assistance is increasingly
being recognized by teachers, administrators and the community. The counsellor,
therefore, is recognized as a person who provides specialist and professional service
to the pupils vyho need such help. However, since the number of pupils who need
such assistance is large, the counsellors find it impracticable to reach them all.
Hence, a new counsellor role has emerged. This is consultancy. Counsellors can
serve a larger numWr of students by consulting teachers, headmasters, principals
and parents.
In view of the specialist role of the counsellor, increasing attention is being paid
to such issues as the criteria for selection and standards of counsellor preparation.
Interdisciplinary studies are being recommended for enlarging counsellors'
a|q)reciation of the cultural heritage and value systems and to provide a wider scopefor the perception and understanding of human behaviour. The extent of preparation
of counsellors has direct,relevance, to the length of the training programme. The
complexity of a counsellor's job requires preparation of a high order for working
effectively with children, youth and adults in a variety of situations. The exact
nature of the training programme would naturally be based on the job requirements
of the counsellors which depend on the situations in which the counsellors work.
But to base the training programmes on a counsellor's current duties and functions
may not be very useful. Counsellors need to be equipped and prepared, for meeting
unexpected demands in novel situations. Therefore, there is need for stressing
creativity and originality. This is best done by integrating didactic instruction with
an imaginatively designed practicum (comprising laboratory, field study and work
experience). The practicum experience should provide self-analytical and self-


--- PAGE 291 ---
PfoPesstonal Preparation and Training Ibr Counselling Z71
evaluative insights which should be spread across the entire period of training to
enable the counselling student to take on progressively increasing responsibilities.
Counsellors can not only help in the educational vocational choice process but also
in choices concerned with the day-to-day life situations by helping the counsellees
gain self-understanding and become increasingly self-directed and self-dependent
Other issues may surface in the course of the counsellor's professional work which
are not easy to anticipate. Counsellors will be able to resolve the issues, professional
or otherwise, with ease if they are trained to be tactful and rational and have an
abiding faith in human worth and capabilities.
SUMMARY
Counselling as a professional field of service is yet to emerge in India. This is
because firstly, there are no employment opportunities for trained counsellors
and secondly, there are no qualified or trained personnel. This Is a vicious circle
which needs to be broken IF we want to progress. The counselling profession Is
a service profession and. therefore, the selection of the right people ceinnot be
over-emphasized. The prospective entrant to the Held of counselling, It has been
found, would make a success ifhe were to have the necessary personality traits.
The characteristics of a successful counsellor cannot be Inventoried with success
because such a venture would Irtvoive the listing ofail the desirable characteristics
which Is not obviously practicable. A few characteristics, however, may be
listed. A counsellor must be interested In helping people, must be kind, sincere,
emotionally mature, understanding, ^rmpadietlc. knowledgeable, able, InteUlgent
and have a sense of commitment to his profession. One of the Important
characteristics that marks a good counsellor Is his helping attitude.
Counsellor training Involves providing academic and practical training. While
no training programme can ever be complete and final, it has been found that a
desirable counsellor tr«iinlng programme must involve the following: (1)
understanding the process of development tmd the determinants and dynamics
of personality, (2) personality theories,_(3) learning theories. (4) psydiodlagnostic
principles and procedures, (5) psychopathology; (6) social ptychology, (7)
principles and process of counselling and (8) counselling theory. And for
specialization a desirable counsellor training programme must Involve: educational
counselling, vocational counselling, group approaches to counselling and
cowselllng special groups. The counsellor-trainee must have a good practlcum
and supervised counselling experience. The programme envisaged Is a two-year
or four-semester Master's level programme find this may be supplemented by a
one-year professional training programme.


--- PAGE 292 ---
14
odem Tirends in
INlHODUCnON
Counselling as a fast growing dynamic movement has rapidly progressed from its
modest beginnings in the early part of the present century to its current dynamic
Status in a brief period of six decades. In the rapidity of its growth, counselling has
overlooked many issues, causing apparent confusion with psychotherapy,
psychoanalysis, behaviour conditioning, guidance, advising, etc. Yet it is all these
things in one way or the other. The counselling function is claimed to be performed
also by ministers, physicians, social workers, teachers and many others whose
number is ever on the increase. Though counselling, like any other science, is based
on scientific principles of objectivity and verifiability it cannot proceed in the
absence of subjective aspects, such as rapport, warmth and trust
Counselling has earned recognition through its service in enhancing and preserving
human happiness. It is found to be of service by different organizations for increasing
their efficiency and productivity. In the history of its growth, as a science and as
a profession, it has changed its emphasis, aims and roles as can be seen firom its
expanding range of activities in diverse sellings.
What are the dominant trends in the counselling movement? Humanistic
psychology is coming into prominence. Modem counselling clearly shows its cant
to existential views with a significant stress on meanings and personal values in
life. Traditionally, psychology in general, and counselling in particular, tended to
emphasize behaviour—^its pre^ction and control. Their concerns were, for example,
the screening of students for admission to schools and colleges, the selection of
suitable candidates for specific occupations and the increase in personal efficiency
of individuals through narrowly defined diagnoses and psychotherapeutic measures
based on them. There is increasing evidence today that counselling has outgrown
this stage and is becoming increasingly concerned with values and value systems.
CCHINSELUNG AND PSYCHOTHERAPY
The terms 'counselling' and 'psychotherapy' were generally used as disparate terms.
However, an increasingly large number of writers are tending to use them


--- PAGE 293 ---
Modem Trends In Counselling 273
interchangeably. Also the terms, advising, guidance and counselling, have been for
some time used rather loosely. But with increasing specialization and
professionalization, some amount of clarification of the terms is made. Clarification
of the inter-relationship between the terms, namely, advising and guidance, clears
the ground for a discussion of the terms, counselling and psychotherapy. Advising
has now come to be understood as academic advising provided by faculty members
to students who seek assistance concerning their curricular choices. Guidance is
used mostly in educational settings with vocational import. It also involves the
provision of educational and vocational information to enable students to make a
proper choice of courses leading to appropriate vocational goals. Guidance services
understood in this sense have been increasingly found to operate in high-school
settings.
Chronologically speaking, psychotherapy existed long before the emergence of
counselling as a helping service. Psychotherapy can be said to have had its origin
in the work of Mesmer. However, sound and scientific foundations for it were laid
by Freud. Psychoanalysis was acclaimed as psychotherapy par excellence. In the
years that followed, many other techniques were introduced into psychotherapy.
Counselling emerged as a rield of psychotherapy. Both counselling and psychotherapy
aim at changing individuals rather than institutions. Social reform movements are
specifically concerned with the latter. Further, the kind of change sought to be
brought about is different from the change a salesman or an executive or a priest
seeks. Counselling intends to make individuals more self-directed and autonomous.
Thus, the function of counselling is to facilitate the development of self-actualization
in persons. Counselling and psychotherapy are often distinguished in terms of the
siuiations they tackle. In the case of psychotherapy there is an element of pathology
.present in the client
Hie distinction between counselling and psychotherapy was sought to be made
in terms of the nature of the clientele catered to by them. It was argued that
counselling concerns itself with normal individuals and intends to prevent the
occurrence of emotional breakdowns. On the other hand, psychotherapy, it was
claimed, deals with individuals who are not normal. Some element of
psychopathology was involved and clinical treatment was indicated to remedy the
situation. But this distinction was considered unacceptable as abnormality could not
be defined in irrefutable terms. The problem of distinguishing the terms became so
involved that the American Psychological Association (APA) felt it necessary to
entrust the problem to its Committee on Definition, Division of Counselling
Psychology. Counselling, it is pointed out, is essentially concerned with the
psychological development of the individual and it contributes to the total
development of personality.
Counselling is not, it is claimed, an emergency treaunent Psychotherapy, on the
other hand, is concerned with the individual whose emotional growth has become
severely distorted. Bordin makes a quantitative rather than a qualitative distinction
between the terms. According to him, counselling is concerned with emotional
cases of less intensity and he emphasizes cognitive and rational factors in their
treatmenL In cases requiring psychotherapy, however, there is a greater distortion
of reality and cognitive and rational factors may not be of much avail. Sanderson


--- PAGE 294 ---
274 Cbun5ef///if and Cufdan^
Stresses that the counsellor deals with a particular area or difficulty while thepsychotherapist is interested in the total personality structure. Mowrcr holds that
the techniques of counselling and psychotherapy differ'from each other in that the
counsellor gives information, guidance, etc., while the therapist seldom uses these.
The distinction between counselling and psychotherapy has unnecessarily crea^confusion. What is important to bear in mind is that counselling is one type or kind
of psychotherapy. Besides counselling th»e are several other types of psychotherapy-
At one extreme we have the Freudian psychoanalyas as an example of psychotherapy
which is concerned with depth analysis. Counselling, on the other hand, is not
essentially concemd wth depth analysis.
In the case of counselling, no pathology is ever involved. It deals with normal
persons who have problems which do not require prolonged intervention as in the
field of psychotherapy. Here, the counselling assistance consists of providing
'intrapsychic' insight The Manhattan survey found that more than four-fifths of the
subjects surveyed were judged to be suffering from some degree of mental he^thimpairment Our age has been characterized as an age of anxiety Anxie^, according
to Roszck, has a prime role in our civilization. The socialization process inculcates
a certain amount of anxiety. A civUized man has to curb some of his spontaneousimpute which Irads to inhibition and aiKiely. Perhaps iho absence of anxielVwouid itse^ be a kind of pathology or abnormality, the most important funeti®of counseUmg « to reduce ,t eUminate, anxiety by helping the cotinselleeov^ome hts ttjhibthotK and make more rationai decisions both for himself and forothers. CounseUmg is both prevenUve and restorative in its funcUon.
TRENDS IN COUNSELUNG
^ w^p^t2SSg^!ychSo"^ substiiutioii or replacement ofdevelopmental model. In recent times counscS ofassisting counsellees acquire realistic and ^ "moving in the direction
patterns. constructive coping behaviourThere is also the substitution of the tim^ .he
preventive approaches to mental health An JJ . remedial approaches by u
a "deepening awareness that the qualitv nf ° current trend is concerned wiu»a product of the social milieu and reauircQ'^h"^ r" significant measujo-hygienic total school environment" '"f ^i^don of a more psychological^^
The notion of the counseUor opmiin7' tagent in his office is fast losing lu ^ exclusive independent treatment
inci^ use of community agencies an7?f- ™°dem trend is towards Kr®needs, a™ m also a trend towards rete®"^.''""Mang and securingKnow Ail .He is now regarded as one wh„ f. ™'8e of ihe counsellor as a' !>«:welfare and vtiiunt^ agencies whosT re.1 ""f govemmeutal, socrdirrformanon and touning and in helpfg h® freely udiizes in provid.h8'^ydrriiogical rehabiiitalion of dr®


--- PAGE 295 ---
Modem Trends In Counselling 275
ROU OF A COUNSELLOR
The counsellor's role has been redefined and expanded from that of an expert or
specialist who deals with his clients exclusively on a one-to-one basis to that of a
staff-consultant and agent of institutional change. This is a very significant
developmenL The counsellor can be seen in the role of a counsellor-consultant and
he is increasingly involved with consulting academic staff and teaching them skills
ancillary to counselling. The consultant, counsellor attempts to:
1. Enhance teachers' sensitivi^ to student problems of personal growth (Rao,
1967).
2. Demonstrate the application of psychological principles of learning to human
problem solving.
3. Improve the effectiveness of the academic facul^ in institutions of higher
learning.
Another welcome trend is the extension of counselling services to new areas.
The early counselling services were primarily concem^ with younger people,
especiall>L-Studenl&Jn-schools. and_collegM^.The interesting feature of modem
demographic trends is the increase in the proportion of the population in the older
age groups in almost all countries and this poses several pertinent problems which
have not been sufficiently researched. While counselling does not underestim^
4he importance of its service to growing people it is now also looking towards
assisting middle-aged and older people. There is another group of clients whom
counsellors are getting actively interested in. This group comprises women, especially
young and middle-aged ones. Tim high risk students, ttet is, those who are not
likely to make good grades^are ^so^towing tiie counsellor's attention. The^
a^^ to be in greater need of intensive academic counselling. Similarly," familycouns^ing and counselling of minority people and imihigi^t populations are also
promising areas in which counselling is branching out.
A couple of decades back there was a dramatic rise in the use of behavioural
counselling whose nature has been discussed earlier. Notwithstanding the enormous
experimental research using the principles of reinforcement, shaping, desensitization,
aversive conditioning, etc., behavioural counselling has not been found quite
acceptable and applicable in all situations. This has given rise to a lively controversy
which centres on behavioural counselling and appears less related to its ability to
produce changes in people than to the moral and ethical questions involved.
Humanistically-oriented counsellors are distressed by the notion of the control of
behaviour and they frequently make the charge that advocates of behaviour
modification are not sufficiently sensitive to needs, such as personal goals and
f^om of growth of the clients. Behavioural counsellors maintain that their methods
do not entail any threat to individual freedom of choice. However, the limitations
of behavioural counselling,* such as failure to demonstrate' the durability of the
changes produced, amelioration of the self-defeating behaviour of such groups as
alcoholics, drug addicts and the like, have dampened their enthusiasm and there is
revived interest in the humanistic-oriented approach.


--- PAGE 296 ---
Z76 Counsdllng and Guidance
GUIDMiCE
Career gmdance v/as ihe centiai toe oi flve early gmdance movement and consls^of helping the individual choose a suitable vocation. Today, vocational counselling
is coiwemed with career maturity of the individual within a developmental stream.
Towards this end, a counsellor designs intervention strategies to assist his client.
The questions concerning vocational guidance continue to be vexing and unresolved
owing to unpredictability in the rate of change in today's industrial society. Alvin
Toffler (1970) has superbly portrayed the uncertain conditions that could verily
result from super-industrialization. It makes rational career plaiming not only difficult
but also impracticable owing to the accelerated rate of obsolescence.
The counsellor, both at the elementary and secondary school levels, is emerging
as a counsellor to students and consultant to teachers, parents and adminis.traiors.
As counsellor of students he helps resolve the problems of a few students and as
cOTsultant he is able to serve more students by consulting teachers, parents and
administrators, thus enhancing sensitivity to teacher problems and deepening their
insights into pupil behaviour and activities and by initiating them in the basic
skills of pupil guidance. This enhances the scope of the functioning of the counsellor
and helps serve a larger body of pupils, leading to such desirable goals as betterscholastic ^rformance and a significant reduction in behavioural and discipline
problems. The merging range of counselling services will lead to an inier-discplir^ approach m the training and preparation of guidance personnel. Moremeaningful coimselior prepaiauon programmes will have to be implemented. Themost unportam future trend m this regard is the setting up of an increasingnum^ of ^idance semces m the developing countries. For this the developing
advanced c^a^es. Anotherpossible trend of grwt significance is the adoption of sta^ for counsellorpreparation and cemficauon. Counsellins ra!.« ^ standards tor cou
The most fascinating possible trend cnniri t,^ .u . . nf
counselling, far-reaching changes in the education^in greater pupil involvement which would lead may be made, resulU gin the desirable direction. Also, counselim» ^8>We behavioural changInstructional practices and evaluative technim,! ^ead to improved
in other consumer areas. ^O'rnselling may also be requiredCounselling is yet to become a life career in .i, . for
example in countries like India where there • developing countries, as
counselling. The reasons for this neglect are f ° pupil guidance andare facing an uphill task of improving the ma^ m developing countriesare meagre it becomes impossible to
and personality growth programmes. Howew ^ as pupil guidancethat the Indian government will take Bem.in •'^ "®®^ ^»d«re it is very likelystudents. tnterest in providing counselling


--- PAGE 297 ---
S&in*aU
Modem Trends fn Counsdllng 277
THE MODEL OF COUNSELLING
Even before the emergence of counselling as a professional movement, a wide
variety of approaches and orientations were in vogue. Such intervention concepts
as prevention, remediation, outreach, normal development, use of paraprofession^s,
etc., had gained currency. In the contemporary scene counsellors are found to be
working in different situations—individual, group, community—and in such
institutions as schools, vocational bureaux, child guidance centres, etc. This reveals
that neither these new concepts, such as group-counselling, micro-counselling, etc.,
nor the new functions of the counsellors, such as vocational counselling, career-
counselling, employment-counselling, etc., have been brought under and unified
within a single conceptual framework.
There is no theoretical model conceived to provide for the integration of the
expanding activities of the increasing number of counsellors within a single
conceptual framework. Such a model or conceptual frame would be useful for
practitioners, researchers and theoreticians. In this context, the work of the Western
Inter-State Commission for Higher Education (WICHE) assumes great significance.
The Three Dimensional Model
A team of counsellors who were working for WICHE, led by Clyde Parker (1974),
proposed a three dimensional model of counsellor functions. This model was
recognized to be of both practical as well as heuristic value.
For a long time the counselling relationship was described as a face-to-face and
one-to-one relationship between the counsellor and counsellee. But this view has
lost much of its force under the mounting pressure of the need for economizing
effort and maximizing effect This has led to. outreach intervention, in the form of
group counselling. Thus the intervention earlier believed to be only at the individual
level has now widened progressively to deal with (1) the individual, (2) the primary
group, (3) the associational group and (4) the institution or community. The target
of intervention could be any one of the four. The counsellor may work with the
individual, trying to alleviate his personal suffering, or he may work with a primary
group, such as the family or a small group comprising less than ten members,
helping to clarify goals and objectives or helping to improve communication channds
and the like. Sometimes a counsellor may be called upon to work with a largw
group, such as a class in a school. In this context the counsellor may be a participant
observer or may help the group apply itself to finding practicable solutions to
problems involving team work. It may also be necessary for the counsellor to woric
with an institution or a community.
The purpose of intervention at any one of the four levels described above may
be for (1) remediation, (2) prevention, (3) acquisition or learning and (4) development
This comprises the second dimension. Remediation may involve overcoming a
behavioural problem or a habit, such as drug addiction or alcoholism or an
adjustmental problem. Prevention may comprise prophylactic action involving a
programme of mental hygiene or mental health. Such action may not be concerned
with the present situation but with future outcomes so that undesirable behaviour
likely to appear in the. future is prevented. The purpose of intervention may not be


--- PAGE 298 ---
CounselUngand Guidance
sss I— >»development of new attitudes m the members of a communily.
The tlurd dimension of counseUor action concerns the method of miervenuon.
This could be W conventional or traditional direct-service, (2) consultatioii andtrmiting and (.3) media-approach. The objective of counseUing could be the alleviation
of individual suffering, the choice of a vocational career, etc. The method ofintervention could be one of assisting the individual (client) (hrectly by discussing
with turn, by giving him necessary information or counselling him in a face-io-fac®
situation. This is direct-service traditionally practised by counsellors. In recent
times another method of intervention through consultation and training has com®
to be recognized as a practical method. In this method of intervention the counsellor
may be consulting a small group of individuals and training them, who would in
their turn implement the intervention programme to wider or larger groups ofindividuals. For example, the counsellor may trmn a ^oup of school teachers who
would provide guidance services to a large number of pupils. The third method ofintervention is aimed at a much wider section of the community through different
media, such as newspaper articles, brochures, books, radio talks, film shows and
television.
The three dimensions of counsellor functioning, therefore, concem (1) the target-
individual, primary group, associational group and institution or community (2)
intervention (the goal or objective of assistancej-remediaUon, prevention,
acquismon and development (learning) and (3) the methods of intervention-direct
service, consultauon and trairang and media-approach
For a long time the question as to who should be the target of counseUingmt^enuon has been causing some confusion. It was naively explained that theindividual Ghent or counsellee was the target. Since behaviourwS believed todepend on personality structure, the understandina nf w.neved
to help overcome the problems of
superficial. It has now come to be
adjustment are caused by situaiional factors •" ia the
individual exclusively is inadequate. So the attention toof interests to include groups and group situatinn ? widened his r^Sterm associational groups to connote this idea^ B'ersteidt (1970) has .group are expected to have similar needs aS' ^often found to pursue their interests in a similar interests. They areassociational groups are students in a da fashion. Some examples o
club, etc. The counselling intervention is a" of a hostel, members of apatterns, interactions, etc., of the associar^
such as a vUlage or town, do not meet at a P- - members of groupSjgroups. The members of a communiiv associationajoccupations and are found to engage in h-ff interests, pursue a variety oicould, comprise a town or a city or a activities. The community gro"P
community level could concem a chanuenF-^^' intervention at the institutional orthe inculcation of a small family attitudes, etc. For exantpl®;intervention at the communily level. ^ the desired goal or objective of


--- PAGE 299 ---
Modem Trends In Counseillns 279
The earlier method of catering individually to clients had serious limitations.
These are (1) the cost in terms of time and money spent, and (2) the inability to
deal with a large number of clients, all of whom may need assistance urgently. This
leads to a modification of the intervention methods. For example, it is not feasible
for a single school counsellor to meet ail the pupils in the school but it is possible
for him to meet all the teachers a number of times and train them to render assistance
to all the pupils. This mode of approach, namely, consultation and training is now
becoming more popular.
But mass me^a has to be resorted to intervene in an effective manner in the
community for such programmes as family planning, eradication of drug abuse,
smoking, alcoholism, etc.
Thus the three-dimensional model of counsellor functions auempts to embrace
the activities of counsellors in a variety of situations and for achieving different
goals.
In addition, it may be useful if other recognized dimensions of counselling are
briefly described. One of the questions concerns its duration. The early therapies
of the psychoanalytic school were all long-term in nature. The disadvantages of this
approach were too serious to be ignored. Modified psychoanalytic therapies were
introduced with some success. But while counselling should not be too time-
consuming, it may also not be effective if it is too brief. Howevw, the duration of
therapy is largely determined by the counsellee's response.
An important dimension of therapy concerns its depth. It may be contrasted with
the supportive form of therapy which involves reassuring the counsellee by providing
the necessary guidance and by reinforcing existing coping mechanisms. Depth
therapy, on the other hand, helps the individual to' overcome deep-rooted conflicts
and traumatic experiences. The goal of depth therapy is to secure personality
integration and effective coping pattans. While depth therapy is usually long-term
in nature, supportive therapy is comparatively brief.
Another interesting aspect of counselling practice is the use of two different
strategies of segregated versus total push coimselling. In the segregated therapy a
counsellor helps the client with a single problem at a time and no attempt is made
to relate it to the life situation of the clienL This is a kind of minimum therapy. In
the total push abroach the counsellor is concerned with the client's overall life
situation. This may naturally concern several problems and may involve working
with other members of the family and community agencies, both professional and
non-professional. Therefore, the total push approach is also designated as 'milieu
therrgty'.
A distinction is also drawn between crisis intervention therapy and personal
growth. As can be readily understood the former is directed at aspects ofimmediate
stress and their removal to provide quick and immediate relief. Such relief could
be of a short-term duration. In contrast, a personal growth-centred approach primarily
focuses on the problem of increased self-understanding and development ofnntendalitles for the fulfilment of the inftivirtnol'e »rnai Tt.« . jpotentialities for the fulfilment of the individual's goal. The crisis intervention and
growth approaches could be used more effectively with normal individuals though
their use with maladjusted persons cannot be underestimated.
The preceding approach is very closely related to eliminating maladaptive patterns


--- PAGE 300 ---
of behaviour and developing coping techniques and competencies. The former may
involve a strategy of short-term intervention involving a segregated type of crisis
intervention. This is achieved by adopting behaviour modification techniques. The
developing competencies approach corresponds to the personal growth approach.
This can be secured by either the inner control or the outer control of the behaviour
of the counsellee. The aim of therapy or counselling in this case is to control the
individual's (client's) behaviour through establishing environmental controls. The
external controls can at best be emergency measures and may not have lasting
effects. Therefore, inner controls have to be developed in the client which could
change his value assumptions.
It will be seen from the above that counselling has to be broad in its approach
and expectations. The three-dimensional model of counsellor functions briefly
described in the first part of this chapter and the different innovative approaches of
counselling outlined in the latter part adumbrate the present status and scope of
counselling. It is rapidly working towards the goal of freeing the individual of his
•conditioned' habits, modes of thought, coping mechanisms, interests, attitudes and
values, thus enabling him to confidently face the 'future shock' of a super-
industrialized society where values have no permanency.
VALUES IN COUNSULING
niat coun^Umg should stress rauonal uuderstauding and problem-solving skills isuicreasingly being qu^boned. Several studies have shown lhat a certain imount of "atnoety ts nec^ for aebtevement. It appears that too tnnch atlenUon is beingpaid to ranonaitty necessttahng some rethinking on this vital issue
^r^ate problems for the
individual members, is fast r ,h
problems which ih^ had not bargained for Thi's hn™ confronted wincrease in anxiety resulting from uncertainty as to hat
rules to follow. ^ ^ values to hold and what
Social change has affected not only family lif^. h.,. i . f«r
example, the status of women. This issue involvp^ °
of relationships as well. These include parent several other t^Many families today are characterized bv a inrv f* husband-wife relations,
is no open conflict between the generations °^^"^®retanding even when thereil is not easy for the counsellor to advise thft? p '. ^ another area where
one set of standards and the children another An • , the parents havebecoming apparent is 'ascending education^
of the old. It is not uncommon to hear fmm"ih become teachersabout new things and that they have m r® 'hat adults do not knoiv
Another aspect which is of fundamental^^®'"and anxiety for modernization. We are enBao^'^® ^\is\a India is our conceiti
traditional to the modem form of livinB anrt? . *" ^ movement from thei™g,andbymo(tem'weladUymeanweslemi®d


--- PAGE 301 ---
Modem Trends In Counselling 281
technological modes of living. Many aspects of this movement are of considerable
concern to the counsellor. What are the effects of this thrust? Is it true that the
effects of rapid industrialization are the disruption of inter-personal relations, an
increase in crime, alienation of the youth, disrespect for elders, sharp increase in
delinquent behaviour and other maladjustments? How should the counsellor deal
with this situation?
With advances in the field of medicine, environmental hygiene and better nutrition,
man's longevity has increased. What is the role and status of these older people in
society? Retirement from positions of authority and prestige can be a very devastating
experience. How can the 'retirement-shock'be assuaged? The counsellor's role should
be to assist the 'senior citizens' to make optimum adjusunent
The tremendous technological progress may create problems of obsolescence or
unemployment where the government could suggest two approaches—'recyclage',
that is, using adult members for new tasks by putting them through well-planned
and designed refresher-courses, or 'encyclage*, that is, providing training to
individuals in occupations different from those they are engaged in to enable them
to enter new careers, if it becomes necessary. The counsellor will, therefore, have
to play the role of a cultural mediator and help individuals adjust themselves to the
new conditions of living. This has implications for value-orientations in counseUing.
Should the counsellor impose his values on the clients? It is agreed in all circles
that he should not, but he inevitably does. He must inculcate the development of
healthy and desirable attitudes.
By establishing warm and friendly relations, the counsellor has to help clients
overcome their inhibitions about discussing their problems freely and openly with
him. The next issue concerns decision-making. In the western culture this comprises
a very important aspect of the counselling of young people. But in oriental cultures
in general, and India in particular, decision-making is to a certain extent culturally
determined. A young man or a woman is expected to consult the adult members of
the family even in matters such as choosing a course 'of study, entering a specific
occupation or choosing a life partner. Hence, autonomy, independence and the
ability to stand on one's own feet and make one's own decisions are not stressed
upon. In western cultures, however, these are considered positive attributes.
In India we are passing through an unenviable phase of transition. There is a
tendency to cling to past values and simultaneously crave for things which are not
consonant with the past values. This has resulted in an identity crisis, particularly
of the youth. The counsellor has to be mature enough to strike an appropriate
balance and help the youth to have sound values. The counsellor could have problems
with his counsellees who may be struggling with the new values and trying to cling
to the past values. This may lead to a clash between loyalty to old values and the
desire to pursue new values. The counsellee's value structures are thus of a crucial
nature and the counsellor has to. work in terms of his own value structure which
may not be similar to that of the counsellees. In this context the counsellor isconcerned with the question of whether or not to impose his own values upon his
clients. The basic admonition is that the counsellor should not impose his values.
But he invariably does so either unknowingly or unwittingly.
In the contemporary Indian context several basic values, traditionaUy heia


--- PAGE 302 ---
282 CounselUngand Guidance
sacrosanr-t, are increasingly being questioned. One of the major values concerns the
attitude to authori^. Youth is becoming increasingly resentful of authority and the
implications of this for counselling are obvious. The closer the counsellor is to
administrative authority the farther he will be fixim his counsellee. In the words of
Wrenn, the counsellor should "bd a person who does not represent authority per se,
but who represen^ the concem/for the individual per se".
The 'generation gap' also affects counselling. The importance of past experiences
for solving present problems is becoming questionable. The counsellor too must be
on his guard not to reason firom his past experience for this may not always give
him a clue to understanding the counsellee's problems.
As has been mentioned earlier, the attitude towards women has undergone a
considerable change. They are no longer confined to their homes but are taking up
careers which earlier were exclusive only to men. The counsellor, therefore, should
not look askance at a.female counsellee who does not propose to enter into matrimony
or one who proposes to enter such fields as mountaineering, forestry and the like.
The counsellor would do well to present the facts in full and not try to influence
the counsellee. The Indian attitude towards sex has been different from that of the
OccidenL Sex is looked upon as something intimate, precious and sacred. Sex is not
identified with the fplfilment of carnal desire. Women are not expected to freely
mix with men and they are expected to maintain a certain distance. In contemporary
life when women and men work together in offices and factories side by side it
becomes impractical for women to observe the 'safe distance' dictum. Questions
such as what should be done about pre-inarital sex, sex outside marriage, bigamous
relations, etc. loom large. The masculine altitudes towards these are obviously
biased in their favour. Different standards for men and women create avoidable
confusion, conflict and also crisis. There are several other values of equal importance
but it is not practical to discuss them here for reasons of space.
The counsellor must of necessity widen his field of work to include the new
problems which are surfacing as a result of rapid change. If the counsellor is
understood to be a culture-interpreter, culture-mediator and an agent for culture-
change, he must of necessity move into a wider area (of human Ufe) and make it
the canvas for his work.
SUMMARY
raere 15 some contelon concerning the use of the terms, counselling endpsychotherepyjome wdters tde the terms Interchangeably while others rrSee distinction between them. The view that Is presented here suggests thatcounselling Is one Wnd of psycho herapy. There are seveitd othf types ofp^chotheiaptes apart from counselling. ^ types or
The modern trends in counselling concern ,
counselling. In the e^ m of the ptesent century the rSedliTSL ofremediation was popular. This, however, is rapidly gtvlnn dace
approaches. Counselling Is no longer an activity which largely Involve Se mZ
of a specialist called a counsellor. The modem trend Is to tTe acSa^faseveral agencies and Institutions to bring about desirable counselling omSS«!


--- PAGE 303 ---
Modem Trends In Counselllns 283
Qosely related to this Is the changlr\g role of the counsellor. In Gie past, the
counsellor was largely concerned with the counsellee Involving a face-to-fece or
direct one-to-one relation. This role Is fiastgMng place to the consultant role of
the counsellor. Employing dils approach the counsellor can seive a much wider
clientele. Counselling has to Inaeaslngly concern Itself with helping individuals
foce the future. In this role the counsellor has to work wldi not only teachers but
witii administrators In a varied of settings ianglr\g from schools to Industries.
Counselling has reached a stage In Its development when It Is rtecessaiy to
think of a conceptual model for explaining all Its functions. With this need In
view the Western Inter-State Commlsdon for Higher Education (WICHE) has set
up a commlftee under the chalmvinship of Clyde Parirer. TTie work of the
committee has been gratlWrig. They have proposed a three dimensional model
of counsellor ftinctlons. This Involves the target of lnterventlor>—the Individual,
the primary group, the assoclatlonal group or the Institution or community. The
second dimension concerns the purpose of Intervention—remediation, prevention,
learning and development. The third dimension concerns the techniques—direct
service, consultation and training and media approach. This model Is of great
practical utility.
There Is Increasing evidence drat counselling Is becoming more Interested In
and Involved wIth.vaJues. Several changes are taking place In the social life.
There are significant changes In man's environment afSsctlng maiv of his attitudes.
If counselling Is to be of any value It cannot Ignore ttre value syst^.
In India, after Independence, owing to rapid economic and social progress
seveial ch^es have taken place In our attitudes. The significant changes Inattitude towards authority, eiders, women and sex have great Implications for i
counselling. I
-ifi'
I  .
•i.ii'yi ;


--- PAGE 304 ---
^
The StatMi
wllin.
m
INTRODUCnON
Counselling is not a novel institution in the Indian context The first counsellor was
Lord Krishna himself and the Bhagavad Gita embodies the finest principles of
counselling for people of all lands, all ages and of all limes. The Gifa or the Song
Celestial explains how Aijuna, whose mind was in great conflict, was helped to
overcome this conflict through an insight into himself. Aijuna's conflict was one
of 'mine and thine', that is, between Svo and Para. The conflict was resolved throughself-understanding or through self-realization. One has to act in accordance with his
Swadharma. Man should act in accordance with the demands of his station and his
duties in life. Self-realization, understood in the context of the Gita, is not the same
as what we understand by the term in the Rogerian or existential sense. Man has
to realize his inner nature, that is, his spirituality which reveals oneness with the
ultimate. This helps to overcome the illusory distinction between the Atma and the
Paramatama. In the pursuit of the higher spirit, man is concerned with freedom
freedom to obtain self-realization. In modem times the word 'freedom* is used in
a different sense. Its connotation is limited to freedom of xtion, speech, religious
faith as well as freedom to find the fullest expression for one's potential. In this
sense of the term, we are immediately concemed with material existence and the
psysical world.
In the ancient world of the Orient, the pupil has the choice or freedom to seek
his own guru (teacher). The guru, in his turn, was free to give the kind of education
that he thought best suited the pupU and was free in the choice of the method ofinstruction. However, this gurukula system of education could not survive the
onslaughts of repeated foreign invasions. It disappeared and was replaced by aUen
models of education. The element of freedom that was present in the ancienteducational system came to be substituted by regimentation. Pupils had to learn
from a fixed curriculum and teachers were bound to teach along the lines of this
fixed curriculum. Thus freedom disa^ed from the scene of Indian educationIndian society came to be much maligned by the Varnashrama dharma The socie^


--- PAGE 305 ---
The Status ofthe CounsellingMovementIn India 285
ly, century after century, became moreri^d in its dogged and dogmatic adherence
to it. There was no opportunity for social mobiliQ'. Indian society consequently
became highly traditionalistic and conventional. The Vedic prayer
Asato ma Sadgamaya Lead me from the unreal to the real
Taraaso ma Jyotirgamaya Lead me from darkness to light
Mrityor md Amruiamgamaya ... Lead me from death to immortality
has lost its significance in the degenerate society of colonial India. Freedom and
independence have been substituted by dependence. The youth in India today is
dependent on adult members for such important decisions as the choice of residence,
choice of a job and choice of a marital parmer, to mention but a few. What relevaiice
does counselling, therefore, have for ^e Indian situation? The important forces of
social change, namely, industrialization, urbanization, mass media of communication
and the like, have battered the traditional, social conventions and institutions and
have made several dents in them. Compared with the nineteenth century Western
society, contemporary Indian society is more radical and provides enormous
opportunities for individual choice of action. The zeii geist of contemporary Indian
society is quite hospitable to counselling; in fact it makes counselling essential.
The kind of counselling assistance sought for and provided in the western world
need not necessarily be applicable to the Indian society. However, counselling is
as much necessary in India today as it is elsewhere in the world.
COUNSELLING MOVEMENT IN MODERN TIMES
The origin of the connselling movement in India shouid 1« nalnmliy tmced to te
beginnings of psychoiogy in India. It was at Ihe Mysom Umvers.ty tn Somh Indtathat the Lt Chir in psychoiogy was endowed. Perhaps leas than a year or sobefore this, the Calcntia University started a department of psychology wtth alecturer as the in-charge Head of the Department. .Ulcj as uic 111 I. ® then psychology did not make much of a
or more than tw , . . y j:- the mid-1940s the Patna University
eadway at the other , closely followed by one at the Banaras Hinduaj^d a ''=P«' However, much of the progressUniversity, the Luckno deoartmenis came about during the 1960s. Themanifes^ in the preparing students for post-graduate degreesvarious departments have modem experimental approach,m psychology with emphasis psychology came to be established as an
Alongside this die exisUng departments of psychology. The
independent department or swuo university was established in 1938 and
applied psychology section o . ^le Patna University, in 1945. However,
the department of psychologicm^ ypcaUonal guidance, did nof figure as an
counselling psychology or its psychology was offered. However, first inimportant service at universtu private agencies came to be established toCalcutta and later in Bombay, v Calcutta the guidance movement became
provide guidance on a college. In Bombay, Bailiboy and Mukherjiassociated with the David Hare 1 ram »


--- PAGE 306 ---
286 Counsellingand Guidance
started, in 1941, a private agency known as the Batliboy Vocational Guidance
Bureau. The founders of this bureau who hailed firom Calcutta had some experience
in the field since they worked at the Calcutta bureau. The Batliboy Bureau ran for
six years, after which it ceased to function. However, during this brief period it
rendCTCd valuable service to the community. It successfully ran, for the first time,
a short-term orientation course in guidance for teachers, this was the forerunner of
all the later training courses conducted for career masters at several places in India
(Khorshed, 1963).
GUIDANCE MOVEMENT AFTER INDEPENDENCE
The major step in the guidance movement was marked by the establishment of the
Vocational Guidance Bureau by the trustees of the Parsi Panchayat. a voluntary
organization in Bombay. The Batliboy Bureau bequeathed its materials to this
bureau. The bureau was primarily meant to help the youth of the Parsi community.
Being a denominational institution run by private philanthropists, the bureau had
inadequate resources. Serious problems owing to lack of funds developed leading
to its closure in the early 1950s. Notwithstanding the several handicaps, the director
of the bureau. Dr. H.P. Mehta, rendered meritorious service to the public of Bombay
in general, and to the Parsi community in particular. Dr. Mehta organized severaltraining courses for career masters at the bureau. The bureau was closed down for
want of adequate financial support in the early 1950s (Chothia and Mehta 1955)
It has been reported that the bureau was again started in the 1960s
The next important and perhaps the most far-reaching step was the apoointment
of the Acharya Narendra Dev Committee by the Government of Uuar Pradesh toexamine the issue of proving guid^ce ^schools. Accepting the recommendations
of the committee, the Uttar Pradesh Government established the Bureau ofPsychology in Allahabad. This was the fust time that a Stale Government had taken
interest in the subject of rendering vocational and educational guidance to school
going pupUs. Dr. C.M. BhaUa, a renowned psychologist and author of Bhatia's
Battery of Performance Tests, was appointed as its fust Director The work done
by this bureau was gready acclaimed. Acceding to the demand to extend the «rvire.
to more pupils, the Government of Uttar Pradesh established five regional hnre^Trat Varanasi. Lucknow, Kanpur, Meerut and BareUly. After about a decaS theGovernment of Bombay (now Maharashtra) set up a vocational EuidauSTnl^
It has since been renamed the Institute of Vocational Guidance Sev^ifollowed d.e exMpI^ of Utlar Pradesh and Bombay and set up vocational miZcebureaux ^asncha, ly/o).
Aboutthelimethefirstprofessionaljournal, Jowna/o/c'rty ,.
was released in the USA (1954), the All India Vocational Guidani^S'?®^was organized and a decision was taken to start a journal as its officialultimately saw the light of day in 1956 largely owing to the efforts of D?' HPMehta.


--- PAGE 307 ---
The Status oFthe Counselling MovementIn India
role of the government of INDIA AND UNIVERSITIES
287
In 1954 the Government of India set up the Central Bureau of Educational and
Vocational Guidance in New Delhi and the Central Government came forward with
programmes of financial assistance to various States either to start or to expand
llieir existing guidance bureaux. By 1955, 11 State bureaux were established and
there was a steady growth in various other States as well (Gorkal, 1962),
The M.S. University, Baroda, set up counselling services and appointed a full-
thne counsellor in 1958 with the assistance of the University Grants Commission.
Centre did creditable work and it branched off into test developing work which
roust have seriously affected the counselling work proper. The Centre also offered
a two-year part-time course for school teachers, where classes were held on Satur^ys
and Sundays. However, such part-time arrangements could not do much in
professionally equipping the teachers for guidance work in any significant manner.
During the period of the Second and Third Five-Year Plans there was a
tremendous growth in the guidance movement in India resulting in the opening ofnew universities and hundreds of training colleges to meet the demand for trained
teachers for the several thousand secondary schools which came to be opened in
consonance with the Directive Principles of Universal EducaUon, namely. Article
45 of the Constitution. The guidance bureaux came to be attached to the State
Directorates of Education.
The end of the Second World War in 1945 brought in its wake serious problems
of rehabilitating the retrenched defence personnel. To render assistance to these ex-
defence pesonnel (ex-servicemen) the Government of India established employment
exchanges These have grown and become knit into the National EmploymentServices Organization under the Directorate General of Employment and Triiining,
Government of India. Vocational guidance secuons were attached to employinent
exchanges with the implementation of the recommendations of the Shiva Rao
Committee TTie Government of India gave generow assistant to State Governments
to set up Directorates of Employment and Training. In due course, vocationalguidance cells were created in most of the Directorates of Employment and TrainingSt the State Government levels.
present status of COUNSELLING
The kind of agencies which render vocational guidance can be classified underthree heads:
1 Governmental agencies, including Central and State: The Vocational
■ gS5 Unit of the Ministry of Labour and Employment. Government ofIndia and the Directorate of Employment and Training at the StateSaucers fall under this catepry. The service rendered by thegovernmental agencies is largely limited to givmg employment Informationm ^iSpective job seekers. The guidance «1I Vocational GuidanceOfficers (VGOs) who are expected to penc^ic^ly visit schools to give
career talks and to arrange career conferences for the benefit of the students.


--- PAGE 308 ---
288 Counselling and Guidance
2. The second category of agencies may be broadly classified as private. A
number of voluntary organizations on the lines of the Pars! Panchayat,
Bombay, have come to be established to provide vocational guidance. The
Vocational Guidance Society at Calcutta, the United Christian Mission of
North India at Jullundur, the Gujarat SocieQ' at Baroda and the like, in
addition to the Rotary Club, the YMCA and the YWCA are making a
sigiuficant contribution to the guidance movement.
3. The third category includes univeraty and college-run agencies. The guidance
bureaux at St Xavier's college in Bombay, and M.S. University, Baroda,
were the earliest agencies tendering gmdance and counselling. In recent
times guidance services as well as counselling have come to be offered by
the departments of psychology of several universities. An important example
of this type of service is the one run by the Department of Psychology, S.Y.
University, Tirupali.
The functions of the guidance bureau vary with the type of bureaux. The functions
are well defined in the well established bureaux like the Bureau of Psychology
Allahabad. This bureau provides educational and vocational guidance based oil
psychometric data. The Institute of Vocational Guidance of the Government of
Maharashtra has done meritorious service of collecting and disseminating
occupational information. Several career pamphlets and brochures have been brought
out for the use of school-leaving pupils. The Central Vocational Guidance Bui4uand the Ministry of Labour, Training and Employment, have brought out and are
still bringing out career pamphlets to cover most of the occupations In addition
the Ministry of Labour. Trairang and Employment, published the Employment News'
a fortnightly. The Ministry has published the National ClassificadZo7o7l^^^^(NCO) on the lines of the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOtI S uSAAt the governmental level, the operation of the guidance programmes is assigned
to the State Directorates of Education. The State Bureaux arp w ,Tt, .i P,Directorates of Education and they are guided and assisted by th^cTntJ^l^^ufeauthe National CouncU of Educational Research and Training fNCER^ mThe NCERT runs a one-year diploma course for the guidL^ SI ^bureaux have also been conducting short-term training courses
career masters (Odgers, 1962). for
A lukewarm attitude towards counselling still exi«ic in ^
to the fact that it is a foreign concept. A number of factors togTtheT^'^ atiribut^for the apathy and indifference on the part of the administration ^
and complacency on the part of the teachers who believe ihar community
in the existing educational pattern. counselling is irrelevantCounselUng, it is thus seen, has not yet come of age in Indi« -n, • •
amount of conceptual confusion regarding the terms 'miiH • sufficient
During the 1970s other areas of guidance and counselling 'counselling'.
Family Planning Association of India (FPAI) offers organized. Theat its Bombay and New Delhi centres. A number of " • ^ ^umily welfarehave sprung up in recent times in metropolitan cities ®°nnselling centres
This brings us face-to-face with the aU important ouMrinn oomtoy and New Delhi,requirements of counsellors. regarding the professional


--- PAGE 309 ---
The Status of the Counselling Movement In India 269
In 1961, the Allahabad University started a counselling centre for its students
with the assistance of the United States Educational Foundation in India (USEFI).
The reason for its failure, perhaps, was due to its dependence on professors from
American universities, research scholars and students who were brought to India on
the Fulbright Educational Programme. The work at the counselling centre was more
in the nature of a student personnel services centre with a dean of student welfare.
The experiment was not a success and the centre was closed down in 1966.
St. Xavier's College, Bombay, has provided counselling service to its students
since 1955 and the counselling was done by pastors in the beginning. But from
1960, it has tended to become psychologically oriented. The college has a full-time
counsellor. The college provides training facilities for school counsellors at St
Xavier's Institute of Education.
The Wilson College of Bombay set up a counselling centre for its students in
1963 with a counsellor. The Delhi University planned to organize a counselling
centre in 1965 with the assistance of the University Grants Commission (UGC).
The Department of Psychology took the initiative and started the centre which had
a lecturer of psychology in charge. At the Annamalai University also, counselling
services were set up during 1965-66 with the help of a Fulbright Professor. But this
did not succeed as the administration could not decide whether the-counselling
centre should be placed in the Department of Education, or Psychology or Philosophy.
The SNDT Women's University, Bombay, has appointed a dean of students and
they are providing student personnel services on a modest scale.
The overall picture of counselling in India is dismal as far as organized work
and provision of professional services are concerned. Much of what passes for
counselling is of a doubtful nature since few qualified personnel are available. The
University of Baroda, St. Xavier's College, Bombay, and other such instiludons
claim to have offered courses for the training of counsellors.
The most important reason why the status of counselling in India is unenviable
is the lack of employment opportunities. Counselling is presumably done by teachers
drawn from different disciplines who do not have the knowledge, understanding,
enlhusiasm, responsibility or commitment to rentier coimseiling. What usually pKses
as counselling service is a kintl of stuiient service started by a few colleges whose
principals and a few staff members perhaps have pamcipated in student sev.ceLinL organised in India and USA under the auspices of USEFI. It is essennalto recOEuiae that student personnel services are not the same as counselling.Counsellins Is psychotherapeutlc assistance mquinng academic preparation,"  . g P supervised internship. A few enterpnsmg teachers who
C™1 tTJmselves counsellors have been found to be staffing most of the guidanceSH coupling centres. As of present, there is no legislation for the cemficauonof rounsellotn this scene is fast changing, with the several
Howevefi h ® different universities coming of age. Some of them
departments of psychology a offering postgraduate courses in the field,
have been specializing in j overcome the early teething troubles and isIt could be said that counselling ^ jggpgd from the status of the professionalmaking steady "Offerings alluded to above,bodies and the cumcular ofienng
1


--- PAGE 310 ---
290 Counselling and Guidance
Two professional bodies in the field are the All India Vocational Guidance
Association started in 1954 and the National Vocational and Educational Guidance
Association started in 1967. The former body has not been active since 1967-68.
The latter organization is more homogeneous and its membership is open to
individuals with a master's degree in psychology or education. This body is reported
to have an active membership of 60 life members and 300 ordinary members.


--- PAGE 311 ---
UMIogrsiphy
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
Abt, L.E. and L. Bellak (Eds): Projective Psychology: Clinieai Approaches to the
Tola! Personality, New York, Knopf, 1950.
Ackcrman, N.: "Biterlocking pathologies in family relationships, in D.G. Rados
(Ed), Changing Concepts in Psycho-analytic Medicine". New York, Gnme and
Stratton, 1956.
: The Psychodynamics of Fanuly Life. New York, Basic Books, 1958.
: Treating the Troubled Family. New York, Basic Books, 1966.
: "Family interviewing: The study process," in Ackerman, N. Lieby and J.
pearce (Eds), Family Theory in Transition. Boston, Little Brown, 1970.
Allen, C.: Modern Discoveries in Medical Psychology. Second edn., London,
Macmillan, 1949.
Allport, G.W.r The Individual and His Religion, New York, Macmillan, 1950.
; Becoming. New Haven, Yale University Press, 1955.
Allport, G.W., P.E. Vemon and G. Lindzey: Study of Values. Third edn., Boston,
Houghton Mi^in, 1961.
American Psychological Association: "The objectives of counselling". American
Psychologist, 1956, 11, 282-285.
: "Ethical standards of psychologists". American Psychologist, 1968,23,357-
361.
Angyal, A.: Foundations for a Science of Personality. New York, Commonwealth
Fund, 1941.
Annis, A.P.: 'The autobiography: Its uses and value in professional psychology".
Journal of Counselling Psychology, 1967,14, 9-17.
Appcll, M.L.: "Self-understanding for the guidance counsellor". Personnel and
Guidance Journal, 1963, 42, 148.
Arbuckic, D.A.: "Five philosophical bsues in counselling". Journal ofCounselling
Psychology, 1958, 5, 211-215.. Pupil Personnel Services in the Modern ScAoo/. Boston, Allyn and Bacon,
1962.
- "The school-counsellor, really or illusion?" Counsellor Education and
Supervision, 1963,2,54-65. , . .. . . j -
ATQenian S.: "American personnel and guidance associauon, code of ethics .
Personnel and Guidance Journal', 1961, 40. 206-209.
Baldwin A L.: "Personal structure analysis: A statistical method for investigating
the single personaUy". Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1942,37,163-183
T> A • "Psvchotherapist's anxiety level, self insight and psychotherapeutic
m2i«" Jo^rnl of Abnormal and Social Psychology. 1956, 52, 333-337.1  T R • "Sociomclry: Rationale and technique for effecting behaviour changeBarclay, J.i^ personnel and Guidance Journal, 1966. 44.1067-1076.
n SI, E B BdZational Theory, New York. Harper & Brothers. 1961.bZkCM.- Philosophical Foundations of Guidance. Englewood Cliffs, NJ., Prentice-Hall, 1963.


--- PAGE 312 ---
292 CoimsdIIng and Guidance
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
Beilin, H.: "The application of general development principles to the vocational
area". Journal of Counselling Psychology, 1955, 2, 53-57.
Bennett, M.E.: Guidance and Counselling in Groups. Second edn.. New York,
McGraw-Hill, 1963.
Berdie, R.F.: "Counselling—An educational technique". Educational and
Psychological Measurement, 1949, 9, 89-94.
'• "Change in self-rating as a method of evaluating counselling". Journal of
Counselling Psychology, 1954, 1, 218-224.
Bicrstwdt, R.: The Social Order. Third edn.. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1970.
Bigge, M.L. and M.P. Hunt: Psychological Foundations of Education. New York,
Haiper and Row, 1962.
Binswanger. L.: "Existential analysis and psychoihcr^y", in ftomm-Reichmann
and J.L. Moreno (Eds), Progress In Psychotherapy. New York, Grune and Stratlon.
1956, 144-148.
Bixler, R.H.: "The changing world of the coimsellon I-New approaches needed".
Counsellor Education and Supervision. 1963, 2, 100-105
Bixler. R.H. and J. Seemam "SuggesUons for'a code of ethics for consultingpsychologists . Journal ofAbnormal and Social Psychology. 1946, 41, 486-490.
Blau. P.H.: e/ fl/.: "Occupational choice: A conceptual framework".' Irdustrlal and
Labour Relationships, 1956.9,531-543,
W'. re„owu:l md GuidcmceJournal, 1966, 44, 824-830.
=T— New York, The Roneld Pre,,. 1966.
development
|cmw. H. (Ed)i Men in . Wodd a. Wo,k. Boaion, HoughUm Mifflin, 1964, pp. 48-
"Career development: A future for
ij. Pietrofese (Eds), Counselling and Gd^TS^^^K-' ®Houghton Mifflin, 1970, pp. 35^, Twentieth Century. Boston.
Counselling. 1978^1, M2.' ^ Journal for the Advancement of
-Therapeutic Psychology: Fundamental, ,■ .
Psychotherapy. Sec. edn. Englewood Cliffs N T Counselling and
Brammer, LAI.: "Eclecticism revisited" pjJ ^"^'^s-Hall, 1968.192-197. * Guidance Journal, 1969.48.
Brayfield, A.H.; "Vocational guidance today" in P r w,,-
Counselling: A Reappraisal In Honour ofDormM^n ^ (Ed), Vocational
in Student Personnel Work, No. 11 Minnen r Minnesota Studies
1961, pp. 22-58. ' University of Minnesota Press,


--- PAGE 313 ---
BMqgrapby 293
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
6Z
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
: "Counselling psychology in annual review of psychology". Palo Alto,
Annual Reviews, 1963, Vol. 14.
BrayScld, A.H.: "Research of vocational guidance: Status and prospect part F', in
H. Borow (Ed), Man in a World at Work, Boston, Houghlon Mifflin, 1964,310-323.
Bronfenbrcnner. U. and M.T. Newcomb: "Improvisations—An application of
psychodiama in personality diagnosis". Sociometry, 1948,1, 381—382.
Broverman, el at.: "Sex role stercoQpcs clinical judgement and mental health".
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 1970, 28,59-78.
Buchheimcr, A.: Empathy in Counselling. A.P.GA. Address, March 28, 1961,
Mimeographed.
Bugental, J.F.T.: Psychological Interviewing. Unpublished manuscript, 1952.
Bym, K.D.: The test interpretation—planning interview. Unpublished pq)er developed
for use in (raining at the UniversiQ' of Michigan.
Byrne, R.H.: "Proposed revision of the Bordin-Pepinsky diagnostic constructs".
Journal of Counselling Psychology, 1958, S, 184-187.
: The School Counsellor. Boston, Houghlon Mifflin, 1963.
: The School Counsellor. Second edn., Boston. Houghton Mifflin, 1968.
CaJUs, R.A.: "Toward an integrated theory of counselling". Journal of College of
Student Personnel, 1960,1, 2-9.
• "Diagnostic classification as a research tool". Journal of Counselling
Psychology, 1965,12, 238-243.
Campbell, D.P.: "Achievements of counselled and non-counselled students twentyrxva ycmatiercomselling". Journal ofCouselling Psychology, 1965,12,287-293.
CarVhuff, RJ^-! "New directions in training for the helping professions: Toward a
technology for human and community resource development". Counselling
Psychologist, 1972,3, 12-30.
Carichuff, R.R. and B.G. Bcmson: Beyond Counselling andPsychothert^y. New Yorit,
Holt, Rinchart and Winston, 1967.Cartwright, R D. and J.S. Vogel: "A comparison of changes in psychcmeurotic patients
during matched periods of therqiy and no therapy". youma/o/Confu&ir^PsycAotogy.1960, n^andB; Lcmer "Empathy, need to change, and improvement with
j'ournal of Consulting Psychology. 1963,27,138-144.psych W and D.W.Fiske: "Method faciOTsin-changes associated
wS^^hoihe^apy".'/o«™i/ of Abnormal and Social Psychology. 1963,66.164-
i?". r M • PolUical Philosophies. New York, MacmiUan, 1950.Chester, w-uta- " A brief account of vocational guidance movement
Chothia. F.S. and H ^ Educational Guidance. 1955,2.
in India . -5"^- -L. nj Gibian and AM. Sniffen: "Group counselling: AnCohn. B.. C. F. ^°^°f'.Q^jance Journal, 1963,42, 355-358.crientotion". Perso pncholoev ondModemLife. Third edn., Glenview, Scott(:o\ccnea.iC.-AbnormalP^">Sy
Foresman wd ^^p^hology and Modem Life. Fifth edn.. Bombay, D.B.
lWpoicwala & as a learning process". Journal of Counselling
Combs, A.
Psychology. 1954. l. f CounselKng Psychology. APA, "CounseUingC^ltee on PsychoU,g!s,. 1956, U, 282-285.Dsvchology as a speciality • ^ . ^japeudcrelaUcmship and therapists* successiveCoinad. D. C.:
judgementsofpaiients mentaiw
233.


--- PAGE 314 ---
Z94 Counsellingand Guidance
75. Cottle, W. C. and N. M. Downie: Preparation for Counselling. Second cdn.,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ., Preniicc-Hall, 1970.
76. Cribbin, J.J.: "Critique of the philosophy of modem guidance". The Catholic
Educational Review, 1955. 53, 73-91.
77. Crites, J.O.: Vocational Psychology. New York, McGraw-HiU, 1968.
78. Davis, D.A.: Understanding is not Enough. A.P.G.A. Addicss, 1963 (Mimeographed).
79. Demos, G.D. and F.H. Zuwaylif: "Characteristics of effective counsellors". Counsellor
Education and Supervision, 1966, 5, 163-165.
80. Dibner, A.S.: "Ambiguity and anjdety".JoumalofAbnormal and Social Psychology,
1958, 56,165-174.
81. Division of Guidance and Tesmg: Guidance in grades seven, eight and nine: A
report of a study work conference conducted at Kent State University, Columbus,
Ohio State Department of Education, 1960,43-44.
82. Dollard, J. and O.H. Mowren "A method ofmeasuring tension in written documents".
Journal ofAbnormal and Social Psychology. 1947, 42, 3-33.
83. Dollard, J. and N.E. Miller Personality and Psychotherapy. New York, McGraw-
Hill, 1950.
84. Dr^fus, E.A.: "Humanncss: A therapeutic variable". Personnel and Guidance
Journal, 1967.45, 573-578.
85. Dressel, P.L.: Implications of recent research for counselling, yourno/ ofCounselling
Psychology, 1954,1, 100-105.
86. Dressel, P.L. and associates: Evaluation in Higher Education. Boston, Houghton-
Mifflin, 1961.
87. Dugan, W.E.: Guidance in the 1970s. The School Counsellor, 1963,10, 96-100.
88. Dymond, R.F.: A preliminary investigation of the relation of insight and empathy.
Journal of Consulting Psychology, 1948,13.
89. : A scale for measurement of empathic ability. Journal of Consulting
Psychology. 1949,13.
90. : "Adjustment changes over therapy from self-sorts", in Rogers, C.R. and
R.F. Dymond (Eds), Psychotherapy and Personality Change, Chicago, University of
Chicago Press, 1954, 76-84.
91. Ebel, R.L., Chairman: The Social Consequences of Educational Testing. Proceedings
of the 1963 invitational conferences on testing problems, Princeton, N.J., Educational
Testing Service, 1964.
92. Edgar, T. E.: "Wishful wish, evaluation without values". Personnel and Guidance
Journal, 1966,44,1025-1029.
93. Ekman, P.: "Body position, facial expression and verbal behaviour during interviews".
Journal ofAbnormal and Social Psychology, 1964, 68, 295-301.
94. Ellis, A.: "Rational psychotherapy" Journal of Generl Psychology. 1958,59,35-49.
95. : Reason and Emotion in Psychotherapy. New York, Lyle Stuart, 1962.
96. : "Goals of psychotherapy", in A.R. Mahrcr (Ed), The Goals of
Psychotherapy, New YoA, Appleton Century Crofts, 1967.
97. English, H. B. and English, A. C.: A Comprehensive Dictionary of Psychological
and Psychoanalytical Terms. New York, Longmans Green. 1958.
98. &iks6n, E.H.: Childhood and Society. New York, W. N. Norton, 1950.
99. : "Identity cycle". Psychological Issues, 1959,1, Monograph, 1.
100. -, Childhood and Society. Second edn.. New York, W. N. Norton, 1963.
101. : Identity Youth and Crisis. New York. W.N. Norton, 1969.
102. Eysenck, H.J.: "The effects of psychotherapy: An evaluation". Journal cfConsulting
Psychology, 1952,16, 319-324.
103. '• "The outcone problem in ptychothtrapy: A r^ly". Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research and Practice, 1964,1, 97—100.


--- PAGE 315 ---
BIbllogiaphy 295
104. Feigl, H.: "yUms of education for our age of scipnce: Reflections of a logical
empiricist". Fifty Fourth Year Book of the Nalioml Society for the Study of Education,
Part I, Modem Philosophies and Education, Chicago, 1955.
105. Fiedler, F.E.: "The concept of an ideal therapeutic relationship". Journal of consulting
Psychology, 1050, 14, M5-245.
106. : "A comparison of therapeutic relationships in psychoanalytical, nondircctive
and Adlcrian therapy". Journal of Consulting Psychology. 1950, 14. 436-445.
107. : "Factor analysis of psychoanalytic, non-diicctive and Adleiian therapeqdc
relationships". Journal of Consulting Psychology, 1951, IS, 32-38.
108. Flanagan, J.C.: "The implicadons of project talent and related research for guidance".
Measurement and Evaluation in Guidance, 1969, 2, 116-123.
109. Fletcher, F.M. and W. Riddle: "The guidance movement in fiidia". Personnel and
Guidance Journal, 1962, 40.
110. Ford, D.H. and H.B. Urban: Systems of Psychotherapy, New York, John wiley,1963.
111. Frank, D.: "Problems of controls in psychotherapy as exempHHed by the
psychotherapy research project of the Phipps Psychiatric Clinic", in E.A. Rubinstein
and MS. Parloff (Eds), Research in Psychotherapy, Vol. 1, Washington, D.C.,
American P^chological Associadon, 1958, 10-26.
112 : "Problems of controb in psychotherapy research project of the Phipps
Psychiatric Clinic", in B.A. Rubinstein and M3. Parloff (Eds), Research problems
in Psychotherapy in Research in Psychotherapy, Vol. 1, Washmgton, D.C^ American
Psychological Association, 1958.
113. : "Thettynamics ofpsychotherqjeudcieladonship". P^Aifltry, 1959,22,47-
59.
114. Frankl. V.E.: Man's Search for Metining. Boston, Beacon Press, 1962.
115. : The Doctor and the Soul. Second edru. New York, Knopf, 1965.
116. fteud, S.: The Interpretation of Dreams. Lortdon. Hogarth Press, 1953 (Rrst German
Edn,, 1900).
117. _: A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis. New Yoik, Liveright, 1935.
118. : A General Introduction to Psychonalysis. Garden City, New York, Garden
City Publishing Co., 1938.
119. : An Outline of Psychoanalysis. New York, W. N. Norton, 1949.
120. Froehlich, C.P.: "An invesdgation of pre-counselling orientation". The vocational
Guidance Quarterly, 1956, 4,103-105.
121. : "Must counselling be individual?" Educational Psychological Measurement,
1958. 18, 681-689..
122. Froehlich, C.P. and K. Hoyt: Guidance Testing. Sdence Research Associates Lie.,
1959.
123. Fromm, B.: Man for Himself. New York, Farrar and Rinehart, 1947.
124. : The Sane Society. New Yoric. Rinehart, 1955.
125. Fuller, E. P.: "Preference for male or female counsellors". Personnel and Guidance
Journal, 1964, 42, 463-467.
126. Foster, J.M.: Psychological Counselling in India. Macmillan, Bombay, 1964.
127. Galbraith, J.K.: American Capitalism: The Concept ofCountervaiiing Power. Boston,
Houghton Mifflin, 1962.
128. Gales, H. D.: "Central and peripheral problems in the counselling procedure".
Occupations, 1949, 28, 106-109.
129. Garfield, S.L.: "A valiant try, review of intcgrative psychology and psychological
case handling", Vols. I and n. Contemporary Psychology, 1969,14, 131-133.,
130. Garrett, A.: Interviewing: Its Principles and Methods. New York, Family Service
Association of America, 1942.


--- PAGE 316 ---
296 Counsellingand Guidance
131. Gelatt, H.B.: "Decision making: A" conceptual frame of reference for counselling".
Journal of Counselling Psychology, 1962, 9, 240-245.
132. Gendlin, E.T.: "Sxperiencing; A variable in the process of therapeutic change".
American Journal ofPsychotherapy, 1961,15, 233—245.
133. Gerier, W.: "Outcome of psychotherapy as a function of client-counsellor similarity".
Dissertation Abstracts, 1958,18, No. 1864.
134. Ginzbc^, E.: Occupationai Choice, an Approach to General Theory. New York,
Columbia University Press, 1951.
135. : 'Towards a theory of occupational choice". Personnel and Guidance
Journal, 1952.30,491-494.
136. : "On career guidance". Counselling: Today and Tomorrow, 1972(a), I: 1:
7-17.
137. : "Toward theory of occupational choice: A restatement". Vocatibnal
Guidance Quarterly, 1972Cb), 20,169-176.
138. : "Autobiogr^hy, the development of a developmental theory of occupational
choice", in W.H. Van Hoosc and J. Piclrofcsa (Eds), Guidance in the Twentieth
Century, Boston, Houghton-Mifflin, 1970.
139. Goldberg, P.: "Are women prejudiced against women?" in D.K. Schaefrer (Ed), Sex
Differences in Personality Readings, Bclmont, Calif., Brook Col., 1971, 62-66.
140. Goldman, L: Using Tests in Counselling. New York, Applcton Centuiy-Crofls, 1961,
39-40.
141. Goldstein, K.: The Organism. New York, American Book Company, 1939.
142. Gomberg, R.M. and F.T. Levinson: Diagnosis and process in Family Counselling.
New York, Family Service Assodation of America, 1951.
143. Gonyea, G.G.: "The ideal therapeutic relationship and counselling outcome". Journal
of Clinical Psychology, 1963,19,481-487.
144. Goikal: "Report on individual guidance grotq> discussoon"./ounial ofVocational and
Educational Guidance, 1962,8, 63-70.
145. Green, A: "Social values and psychotherapy". Journal of Personality, 1946,14,199-
228.
146. Greenspoon, J.: "The reinforcing effect of two spoken sounds on the frequency of
two responses". American Journal ofPsychologist, 1955, 68. 409-416.
147. Gribbons, W.D. and Fit Lohnes: "Validation of vocational planning interview scales".
Journal of Counselling Psychology, 1964,11,20-25.
148. Gtistad, J.W. : "The definition of.counselling", in R.F. Berdie (Ed), Roles and
Relationships in Counselling, Minnesota studies in student personnel woric. No. 13,
Minneapolis, University of Minnesota ftcss, 1953, 3-19.
149. Gustad, J.W. and A.H. Tuma: "The effects of different methods of test introduction
and interpretation on client learning in counselling". Journal of Counselling
Psychology, 1957,4. 313-317.
150. Hahn, M.E. and M.S. McLean: Counselling Psychology. New York, McGraw-Hill,
1955.
151. Hall, C.S. and G. Lindzey: Theories of Personality. New York, Wiley, 1957.
152. H^mrin, S.A. and B.P. Paulsen: Counselling Adolescents. Chicago, Science Research
Associates, 1950.
153. Harper, R.: Psychoanalysis and Psychotherapy: 36 Systems. Biglewood Cliffs. N J.,
Prentice-Hall, 1959,16-19.
154. Havighurst, R.J.: Human Development and Education. New York, David McKay,
1953.
155. Heidegger, M.: Being and Time. London, SCM Press, 1962.
156. Heller, K., R.A. Myers and L.V. Kline: "Interviewer behaviour as a function of
standardized clioit roles". Journal of Consulting Psychology. 1963. 27, 117-122.


--- PAGE 317 ---
BlbUography
157. Hctt, E. L. and S. H. Craraen Vocational Guidance and Career Development in theSchools: Toward a Systems Approach. Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1972.
158. Hobbs, N.: "Science and ethicd behaviour". American Psychologist, 1959,14,217-
225. '
159. Hilton, T.L.: "Career decision making". Journal of Counselling Psychology, 1962,
9, 291-298.
160. Holland, J.L.: "A theory of vocational choice". Journal of Counselling Psychology,
1959. 6, 35-44.
161. : The Psychology of Vocational Choice. Waltham, Mass, Blaisdell, 1966.
162. : Vocarjono/CAoicas.* A r/ieo/y o/Careers. New Yodc, Prentice-
Hall, 1973.
163. Kollingshead: Elmtown's Youth. New Yoric, Wiley, 1949.
164. Hollis, F.: "The relationship between psychological diagnosis and treatment". Social
Casework. 1951, 32, 67-73.
165. Hoppock, R.: "Guidance fifty years ago". Vocational Guidance Quarterly, 1967,16,
130-133.
166. : Occupational Information. Third edn., New York, McGraw-Hill, 1967.
167. t "Occupations and Guidance", in W. H. Van Hoose and J. Hetrofesa (Eds),
Counselling and Guidance in the 20th Century, Boston, Houghton Miffiin, 1970,
90-97.
168. Homer, M.S.: "Femininity and successful achievement: A basic inconsistency", in
J. Bardwick (Eds), Feminine Personality and Conflict. Belmont, Calif., Brooks, CoL,
1970.
169. Hoirocks, J.E.: The Psychology of Adolescence. Fourth Edn.', Boston, Houghton
Mifflin. 1976.
170 Hoyt, D.P.: "College grades and adult achievement". Educational Record, 1966,47,
70-75.
171. Humphreys, A., A.E.Traxlcr and R.D. North: Gtudance Services. Chicago, Sdence
Research Associates, 1960, 381-384.
172. Ivcy, A.E. and S.S. Robin: "Role theory, role conflict and counselling". Journal of
Counselling Psychology, 1966,13, 31-35.
173. Jahoda, M.: "The meaning ofpsychological health". Social Casework, 1953,34,349-
354.
174. : Current Concepts of Positive Mental Health. Monograph Scries, No. 1,
Joint Commission on Mental Health. New York, Basic Books, 1958.
175. Jensen, B.T., G. Coles and B. Nestor: "The critmonproblem in guidance researdi".
Journal of Counselling Psychology, 1955,2,58-61.
176. Johnson, D. G. et al.: "The relationship of counsellor candidate characteristics and
counselling effectiveness". Counsellor Education and Supervision, 1967,6,297-304.
177. Jones, A. J.: Principles of Guidance. Third edn., New York, McGraw-Hill, 1945.
178. Jourard, S.M.: The Transparent Self. New York, Van Nostrand, 1964.
179. : The Healthy Personality. New York, Macmillan, 1974.
180. Kagan,N.,R.D.KrathwohlandW.W.Farquher. "IPR-Jnter-personalprocess recall.
Simulated recall by Videotape". Educadonal Research Series, No. 24 (East Lansing
Bureau of Educational Research Service, College of Educafion, Michigan State
UniversiQ', March, 1965,111-1 to 111-22.
181. Kehas, C.: "Education and personal development", in B. Sheitzer and S. C. Stone,
(Eds), Introduction to Guidmce: Selected Reathngs, Boston. Houghton Mifflin, 1970,
59-71.
182. Kell, B.L. and J.W. Btuow: Development Counselling and Therapy. Boston,
Houghton Mifflin, 1970.


--- PAGE 318 ---
298 Counsellingand Guidance
183.
184.
185.
186.
187.
188.
189.
190.
191.
192.
193.
194.
195.
196.
197.
198.
199.
200.
201.
202.
203.
204.
205.
206.
207.
208.
209.
210.
Kell B L and WJ. Mucllcn Impact and Change: A Study of CounsellingRehdionships. Now York. ApplclonCcn^ Crofts. 1966. .Kelly. G.a!: The Psychology ofPersonnel Constructs. New York. WJ4. Norton &Company, Vols. I and n, 1955. • , r
• Verbal Communication in Psychotherapy. Unpublished manusmpl ot
lectures presented to a post-doctoral institute of the Los Angeles Society of ClinicalPsychologists in Private Practice. January. 1959, 17-18.
Khorshed. A. W.: Guidance Movement in India. Guidance Services Series. No. 4,
NCERT, New Delhi 1963.
Kierkegaard, S.A.: EUherlor: A Fragment cfLife. Princeton, NJ., Princeton UnivcrsiQ'
Press, 1944. . , • .
Koester, O.A.: "A study of the diagnostic process". Educational Psychological
Measurement, 1954,14,473-486.
Koile E.A. and D. Bird: "Preference for counsellor help on fteshman problems"
Journal of Counselling Psychology. 1956,3, 97-106.
Kranzler, GJ^.. GJil. Mayer, G.O. Dyer and P. F. Munger: "Counselling with
elementary school children: An experimental sutdy". Personnel and Guidance Journal,
1966.13, 153-159.
Kroth, J.A.: Counselling Psychology andGuidance. SpringHeld, Illinois, Charles C.
Uiomas, 1973.
Krumboltz. J.D.: "Behavioural goals of counselling". Journal of Counselling
Psychology, 1966,13,153-159.
: Revolution in Counselling Implication of Behavioral Science. Boston,
Houghton Mifflin, 1966.
Krutch, J.K.: The Measure of Man. New York, Bobbs- Merrill. 1954.
Levitt E.E;: "The results of psychotherapy with children—An evaluation:. Journal
of Consulting Psychology, 1957, 21,189-196.
Lewis, E. C.: The Psychology of Counselling. New York. Holt Rinehart and Winston.
1970.
Liebetman. M.: Education as a Profession. Englewood Cliffs NJ Prentice-Mall,
1956.
1960.
The Future ofPublic Education. Chicago, UniversiQ- of Chicago Press,
iTW.
London. P.: The hiodes and Morals of Psychotherapy.Hew Yo± Holt, Rinehart
and Winston, 1964.
Lynd. RM. and KM. Lynd: Middle Town. New York. Harcouit Brace. 1929.
Maccoby. N.. et al.: Sound Film Recordings in Improving ClassroomCommunications. Institute for CommunicaUon Research, Stanford University. 1965.
MahlCT. C.^: Group Counselling in the Schools. Boston. Houghton MiffUn. 1969.
°"entaUons-An ethical dilemma". American Psychologist.1959,14, 687-693.
Maslow, A. H.: Motivation^ Personality. New York, Harper and Row, 1962.
.-T-T-* "Tu Being. New York, Van Nostrand, 1968.tt^Practice. New York. Harper and Row, 1962.May.^: "^e ongins ^ s^ficance of the existenUal movement in psychology".
S  EUenbcrger (Eds). Existence. New York. Basic Books.
Van Nostrand. 1967.
wSi Ronald Book Company. 1950.19^ of Counselling Psychology.


--- PAGE 319 ---
BIbBography 299
215.
216
217
218.
211. McCuIly,C.H.:"Tliecouiisellor—instrumcntofchange".re(KWCo/£.<,..o»..^ v
1965.66.405-412. Kecord.
212. : "Consumption of man and ihe helping profession". Personml and euidmr-^
Journall966,44,9n-91S. «•««»«:«
213. McKiimey, P.: Counselling for Personnel Adjustmenl. Boston, Houghton Mifflin
1958. '
214. Mead. M.: Coming ofAge in Samoa. New York, Mentor Books, New American
Library, 1949.
5. : Growing up in New Guinea. New Yoric, Mentor Books, New American
Library, 195^.^
6. Meehl, P.ETtmd H. McQoslq': "Ethical and political aspects of applied psychology"
Journal ofAbnormal and Social Psychology, 1947,42,91-98.
7. : Clinical versus Starislical Prediction. Minneapolis, University of Mit>n»-yotfl
1954.
^10. ; Some technical and axiological problems in the therapeutie handling of
religious and valualional material. Paper delivered at APA Convention, 1958.
219. Mendelsohn, G.A. and M.H. Gellen "Structure of client attitudes toward counselling
and thcirrclation tocIient-counsclIorsimilariti<!s".youmai of Consulting Psychology.
220 MUIct^C H.: Foundations ofGuidance. New York, Harper and Brothers, 1961.221 Miller' J. V.: Intensive High School Occupational GuidoMe Approaches for Initial
Work and Technical School Placement. Ann Arbor, Michigan. ERIC Clearing Housem r'ntmsellins and Personnel Service, 1969.
flnalvsis" Journal ofCounselling Psychology. 1966,13,82-84.w • vr. Riistitiialism in Education, New York. Harper and Row, 1966.
m Mreien.D.G.andA.M.SchmiiUenGwitocfi«W^ScWs. Tlurd edn..New York, WUey, , cctoelr New York, Wiley. 1976.
227.
1955.34,4-9. m/.Tfi New York, Scribners. 1941.
^ J.J. and D J Arbuckic: "Sensitivity; A measurable conct^t?" Personnel andGuidance dimension of counsellor behaviour.
231. Osburn. H.G.. U^^^j^ofMichigan^ 1952.Ilnoublished doctoral . . —renaration of soiHent iwe,v™—i1 J .liecertation. UlUVerSlty Ot xwiviugtui,
.^fj^lace of counselling in the preparation of student personnel232. Parker, C.A.: Journal. 1966.45,259-260.workers". Personnel ,„,„,-ilins". Personnel and guidance Journal, 1974.
atsymposium Association. New York, Augustof Methods and ineory .
^^"'-Tlierapist-patientrelatiOTUdups and outcomes of psycho^^^^
Ultimate", in A.R. Mahicr (Ed),
236. .——


--- PAGE 320 ---
300 Counsellingand Guidance
The Goals ofPsychotherapy, New Yoik, Applcton Centuiy Crofts, 1967.
237. Parsons, T. and E.A. Shils: Toward a General Theory of Action. New York, Harper
and Row, 1962.
238. Pasricha, P.: Guidance and Counselling in Indian Education, New Delhi, NCERT,
1976.
239. : "The place of values in counselling and psychotherapy". Journal of
Counselling Psychology. 1958,5,216-223.
240. Patterson, C.H.: Counselling and Psychotherapy: Theory and Practice. New York,
Harper and Row, 1959.
241. : "Counselling aziA/orpsy(AioliKiepy".AmericanPsychologist, 1963,18,667-
668.
242. Patterson, C.H.: "A note on the evaluation of the effectiveness of counselling and
psychotherapy". Counsellor Education and Supervision, 1964, 3,129-131.
243. : Counselling and Guidance in Schools: A First Course. New Yak, Appleton
Centuiy Crofts, 1966.
244. : Anintroduction to Counselling in theSchool.Hcw Yak, Harper and Row,
1970.
245. : Theories ofCounselling and Psychotherapy. New York, Harper and Row,
1973.
246. Pepiitsky, H.B.: "The selection and use of diagnostic categories in clinical
cowstllmg". Applied Psychology Monographs, 1948, No. 15.
247. Pepinricy, HJB. and P. Pepinsky: Counselling Theory and Practice. New Yoric, Ronald
Press, 1954.
248. Perez, J.F.: Counselling: Theory and Practice.Ra:^g,Mass,Ad^ony/csley, 1965.
249. Perls, L.P., P. Goodman and H. Heffaline: Cestalt Therapy-Excitement and Growth
in Human Personality. New York, Julian Press, 1951.
250. Phillips, J.E. and D.N. Winen Short-term Psychotherapy and Structured Behaviour
Change, New Yak, McGraw-Hill, 1966.
251. Porter, E.H. Jr.: "Understanding diagnostically and understanding therapeutically",
in E.G. Williamson (Ed), Trends in Student Personnel Wodt, Minneapolis, University
of Minnesota I^ess, 1W9,113-119.
252. : An Introduction to Therapeutic Counselling. Boston, Houghton Mifflin,
1950.
253. Pfay, K.: "A restatement of the generic principles of social casewak". Journal of
Social Casework, 1947,28, 283-290.
254. Prescott, D.A.: The Child in the Educative Process. New Yak, McGraw-Hill, 1957.
255. Raimy, V. (Ed): Training in Clinical Psychology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ., Prentice-
Hall. 1950.
256. Rank, O.: Will Therapy and Truth and Reality. New Yak, Knopf, 1945.
257. Rao, S.N.: Academic Adjustment and Certain Aspects of Pesonality Related to
Academic Achievement. Unpublished PfuD. Thesis, Tirupali S.V. University, 1962.
258. : "I^blemsofadjustment and acadonic achievement". youma/t^Voco/ioRo/
and Educational Giudance, 1964,10, 66-79.
259. : Causes of Student Failure. Symposium on student failure, Indian Science
Congress Association, 1965.
260. : Student Personnel Services in India. University of Minnesota and Associated
Research Councils, Washington, D.C., 1965, 84-88.
261. : "Adjustment problems of college students". Journal of Vocational and
Educational Guidance, 1967,13,.83-92. ^
262. : Student Performance and Adjustment. Tirupali, S. V. Univesity, 1967.
263. : Psychological Factors and Students Unrest. Seminar on student unrest,
Varanasi, Banaras Hindu University, 1969.


--- PAGE 321 ---
Bibliography 301
264. :ScholasticPerformancea^ItsRelationtoAnxiety.Pzoccedmgsof1n^aa
Academy of ^>plied Psychology, 1970.
265. : "A Itegnostic-study of academic achievement". Indian Eductional Review,
: NCERT, 1971, 6.196-213.
266. : A follow-up study of academic achievers and unaer-achievers in an
Engineering College. Proceedings of Indian Scioice Congress Association, 1972.
267. . i "A follow-up study of academic over- and under-adiievers". S. V. University
ToumaJ.19n, 2,97-103.
268. j_^_:^: "Acadamcaiaiety and acHtsvaneat". Psychological Studies. 1974,19,38-
42.
269: Rq>apoit, D;: "The the<ay of ego autonomy: A generalization". Bidletin ofMenninger
Clinic. 1958, 22,13-35.
' 270. • Reaves; G.C. and L.E. Reaves: iii—"The counsellor and preventive psychiatry".
Personnel and Guidance Journal, 1965,43, 661-664.
271. Reid, D JC. and W.U. Snyden "Experiment on recognition of feeling in ncm-directive
psychother^". Journal of Clinical Psychology, 1947, 3, 128-135.
272. Riddle, C.W.: "The problems of Indian college students". Journal cfVocasionat and
Educational Guidance, (962, 8: 2,17-22.
273. Robinson, F,P.: Principles and Procedures in Student Counselling. New Yoric, Harper
and Row, 1950. . ' i
274. : "Guidance for all: In principle and in practice". Personnel and Guidance
v  Journal, 1953.31, 5,00-504.
275. : "Cubist approach to the art of counselling". Personnel and Guidance
Journal, 1963i 41, 675.
276. Roe, A.: The Psychology of Occupations. New York, wiley, 1956.
;277. "Early determiners of vocational choice". Journal of Counselling
■ Psychology. 1957,4,212-217.
278. "Prospectus", in M. Whiteley and Resnlkoff (Eds.), Perspectives in
Vocational Development, Washington, D.C, American Personnel and Guidance
' Association, 1972,127-137.
• 279. Roeber, E-G.-, C.E. Smith and C.E. Eiickson: Organization and Administration of
guidance Services. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1955.
280. Roges, C.R.: Counselling and Psychotherapy. Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1942.
•281: Gteinr Centred r/icr<vy. Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1951.
282. : "Client centred therapy". Scientific American, 1952,187.
•283: .'. ■ 1 . .♦.."Oiangftfi in the maturity of behaviour as related to therapy", in C.R.
Rogers and R.F. Dymond (Eds.) Psychotherapy and Personality Change, Chicago,
;Uiuversity of,Chicago Press, 1954. .
- 284. , ' : i Jifimmino a Person. Oberlin, Ohio, Board of Trustees, Oberlin College,
1954.
285. : "Persons or science? A philosophical question". American psychologist,
.V ..1955,10.267-278:
286. : "Some issues concerning the control of human behaviour". Science, 1956,
124,106(Cl064.- .
287. : "A therapist's view of the good life". Humanist, 1957, 17, 291—300.
288. : I.: ?The necessary and sufficient condidms of therapeutic pesonality change".
• . Journal of Considting Psychology, 1957, 21, 95-103.
289. : "A note on the nature of man". Journal of Counselling Psychology, 1957,
.. 4,199-204. , . . •
290. : "The characteristics of a helping relatioiiship". Personnel and Guidance
Journal, 195i,yi, 6-16: * . 1


--- PAGE 322 ---
302 Counsellingand Guidance
291.
292.
293.
294.
295.
296.
297.
298.
299.
300.
301.
302.
303.
304.
"The Process conception of psychotherapy". American Psyc/iotogtJf, 1958,
as
13,142-149.
; "A theory of theraj^, personally and interpersonal relationships,
developed in the client centered firame-work", in Sigmund Koch (Ed), Psychology:
A Study of Science, New York, McGraw-Hill, 1959, m, 184-256.
: On Becoming a Person. Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 1961.
: 'The inteipersfflial relationship: The core of guidance". Harvard Educational
Review. 1962,32,416^29.
: "The concept of the fully functioning person". Psychotherapy: Research
and Practice, 1963,1, 23.
Rogers, C.R. and R.F. Dymond (Eds): Psychotherapy and Personality Change,
Chicago, Chicago University Press, 1954.
Rosenzweig, S.: "A transvaluation of psychotherapy: A reply to Hans Eysenck".
Journal ofAbnormal and Social Psychology, 1954,49 298-304.
Rothney, J. W. M.: Guidance Practices and Results. New York Harper Brothers,
1958.
Ruesch, J.: "Non-verbal language and therapy". Psychiatry, 1955,18, 323-330.
Ruesch, J. and W. Kees: Non-verbal Communication. Berkeley, Univesity of
California Press, 1956.
Sapok^, A.: "Rdaflonahip patienKloctpr compaUbility, muopU pprceptim
P»y«hPlPEy,%5, 70,^6.u  T S N iT' /S malysia ot role bdiaviopr". in EE.Maccoby, T.M. Newcoinb and E.L. Hartlv • €.. ,¥■. i.
New Y»k, Holt Rinetort and Wma,0^1958
Sartre, J.P.: £*isrenrifl/PsycAoana/yjir. New Yoric PhtWA. ».• 11-u iqs3SchuldL W.J.: "Psychotherapists' approach-aS?,i,!^ ^
expressions of dq>endency".JbiuTw/o/"Courtc ir responses andSchwebel, M.: "Why unethical practi^ «2,122-128. Counselling Psychology, 1955,
Seeman, J.A.; "A study of client self-selection r,f t- , •
Educational and Psychological Measurement ^;y«»»«wial couilselling •"A shidy of theprocess of Tion-j. '• ?»°>327—346.
Psychology, 1949,13,157-168. "^^^""^^^^^''-Journalof Counselling
305.
306.
307. Schwebel, M,
308.
309.
310.
311.
312.
313.
314.
315.
316.
317
318
Shartle,C.L.: Occupational I/formation v„„i
Shertzer, B. and S.C. Stone: Fundament Pren6ce-Hall, 1952.Houghton Mifflin, 1968. Counselling Second Edn., Boston,
: Fundamentals of Guidance t.
Shoben, E.J. Jr.: "Toward a concent 1971.D^hninaSrt 10ST 100 ^ • ifie noTmal personality". American
as personal development" Personnel and
Psychologist, 1957,12,183-189.
: "The cotmseUing exp^enceGtudance Jotimal, 1965,44.
Shostrom, EL.: Man, the Manipulator N« i.Silverman. H.L.: "Psychotherapy: A Abingdon. 1967.
Supplement, 1962.36,116-135. ^ ®valuaUon". Psychiatric Quarterly
. Simon,J.:"AnexistcnUaIvlewofvocaiin„
Jo^l. 1966.44. 604-610. 'l^^lopment:. Personnel and GuidanceSkinner. B.F.: Walden-I\vo.New YoA
Macmilian. 1943


--- PAGE 323 ---
BlbUogiBply 303
319.
320.
321.
322.
323.
324.
325.
326.
327.
328.
329.
330.
331.
332.
333.
334.
335.
336.
337.
338.
339.
340.
341.
34i
343.
344.
345.
346.;
Smith, O.E.: Counselling in the Semndary Schools. New Yoik, Macmillaii, 1955.
Smith, H.M. and L.O. Eckerson: Guidance Services in Elementary
Se/iools.Washington, Government Printing Office, 1966.
Smith. J.E.: Value Conventions and Higher Education. New Haven. The Edward W.
Hazen Foundation, 1958.
Smith, M3.: 'Toward scientific and professional responsibility". American
Psychtdogisl, 1954, 9.
Smith, M.R. (Ed): Guidance-Personnel Work-Future Tense. New Yort Teachers
CoU^e Press, Columbia University, 1966.
Snyder, W.U.: Croup Report of Programs Research in Psychotherapy. State
College, Pennsylvania Stale College, 1953.
Snyder, W.U. and B.J. Snyder: The Psychotherapy Relationship. New York.
Macmillaa 1961.
Snygg. D. A.W. Combs: Individual Behaviour: A New Frame of ReferenceforPsychology. New York, Harper and Row, 1949.
Standley, N.V.: "Kierkegaard and man's vocation". Vocational Guidance Quarterly
1971, 20, 119-122.
Stefihe, B.:,"Vocational development: Ten propositions in search of a theory".personnel and Guidance Journal, 1966, 44, 611-616.
Stefflre, B.P., King and F. Leafgrem "Characteristics of counsellors judged by their
-eers". Journal of Counselling Psychology. 1962, 9. 335-340.
o^er N • "Client IBcaWlity: A variable in the study of psychother^'. Journal ofPsychology. 1963, 27. 175-178.
QhTtDD. H.H.: "PSychotherapeuUc technique, professional affiliation and expeiimceJournal of Counselling Psychology. 1955, 19, l-42(a).
• "Psychotherqieutic technique, professional affiliation and expoience level".h^l of Counselling Psychology, 1955, 19, 97-102(b).
• "The outcome problem in psychother^y revisited". Psychotherapy: Theory.
^T^h and Practice. 1963, 1. 1-13.H J.: Conceptions of Modem Psychiatry. Washington, William Allanson
Sie pCTChiatric Foundation. 1947.' Interpersonal Theory tf Psychiatry. New Yoric, WJf. Norton. 1953.Psychiatric Interview. New Yoric, WJ4. Norton, 1954.
n'p • Aoiiraising Vocational Fitness by Means of Psychological Tests. NewS^S^md Row, 1949.. "Group techniques in the guidance program". Bducatbnal andPsychological
^nt, 1949» 496-510.. "The criteria of vocational success". Occupations. 1951, 30. 5-9.
'! ■'Vocational adjustment: Bnplementing self-concept". Occupations. 1951,
30, ji,eory of vocational development". American Psychologist, 1953,8.185-
'. "TVansition: from vocational guidance to coimseUing psychology"./o«nial.——"'^nine Psychology, 1955, 2, 3-9.
pf^^^Career Deve^^ment: Se^-concept Theory. New Yorit. CoUege Entrance
S^^"V«Son8l development theory: Persons, positions and orooesBes-
-'"^'line Psychologist, 1969a, I, 2-9.development theory m 1988: How will it come about". CounselUns.iVocaOO" 9_i4. 8
. TAe My'f^ of Mental Illness. New York, Hoeber-Harper. 1961.
"f
.  ■!


--- PAGE 324 ---
304 Counsdllngand Guidance
350.
351.
352.
347. Taylor H.: On Educational Freedom. New Yoric, Abelard-Schiiman, 1954.
348. Thome, F.C.: "Principles of personally counselling". Journal ofClinical Psychology,
1950. 6. 301-302.
349. : "ftinciples of psychological examining". Journal of Clinical Psychology.
1955. n, p. 87.
: Psychological Case Handling. Vol. I. Brandon, Vl, Clinical Psychology
Publishing Co., 1968.
Tiedeman, D.V.: "Purposing tteough education: the further delineation of goal
program for guidance", in E. Landy and P. A. Peny (Eds), Guidance in American
Education: Background and Prospects. Cambridge, Mass., Harvard University Press.
1964.
: "A machine for the cpigenesis of self-realization in career development:
Desciipdon, subsequent development and implications", in J.M. Whitelcy and A.
Resnikoff (Eds). Perspectives on Vocational Development. Washington. AmericanPersonnel Guidance Association, 1972, 83-104.
353. Tiedeman. D.V. wd R.P. O'Hara: Career Development, Choice and Adjustment,New York, CEEB, 1963.
354. TiUich. P.: "Existratialism and psychotherapy". Review of Existential Psychologyand Psychiatry. 1961, 1, i-16.
355. Tofller, A.: Future Shock. London, Pan Books 1970
iS? ^ recAmgaej of Guidance. New York, Harper and Row.
35S. Tudcex,l.?.:AdJustment:ModelsandMechamcsYl^wV.^ir A j • i070359. Tuma. A.H. and J.W. Gustad: "TTte eff^ofcharacteristics in client learning in counsellinp" T counsellor person V1957, 4. 136-141. counsellmg . Journal of Consulting Psychology.
360
361
I. Tyler. L.E.:T/i£ Work o//heCounsa/tor. New York ^ ^ iq«
.  : 'Theoretical principles underlvino .tT Crofts, 1953.
362.
363.
counselling Psychology. 1958. 5, 3-10 <»unselhng processes". Journal of
: The Work of Counsellor. Third edn m v .
: The Collegiate Counsellor. Second J rvCrofts. 1963. York, Appleton Century
364. United States Employment'Service: Dictio'"W fP °f Occupational Titles. Third edn.,
366.
367
368
369.
ashington, D.C.. Government PrinUng Offii iQfiV
365. Vance. F.L and T.C.Volsky: "Counsels S" I' ,Siamese twins". American Psycholosi^i iom P^y"°^crapy: Split personally or
,. Warner, W.L.: Yankee City. New Haven r ". 565-570.. Weiner, IB.: "The role of diagnosis in a ""i^ersiy Press, 1963.Counselling Psychology. 1959, 6, liO-ii«: counselling centre". Journal of.. Weitz. R.D.: "An expen witness". Amer! '
White, M.A. and M.W. Harris: "57, 12: 42.1961. 5-6. Psychologist. New York, Harper andRow.
370.
TheCounselUng Psychologist. 1973, 41 we really mean'
371. Wicas, E.A. and T.W. Mahan: "ciharacfi^- •supervisors and peers". Counsellor counsellor rated effective by
372 Wiener. P.: 'The role of the vocational ^'^^islon, 1966. 6, 50-56.and Guidance Journal. 19H 43, 348.Sr expert witness". Personnel
373. WUiamson, E.G.: How to counsel StiotT^^ xt
374- r—r;' "Counselling and the Minnesou McGraw-Hill, 1939.Psychological Measurement. 1947, 7^ 141^15/ and


--- PAGE 325 ---
. r'
Blbltogiaphy 305
375.
376.
377.
378.
3T9.
380.
381.
382.
383.
384.
385.
386.
387.
388.
389.
390.
391.
392.
393.
394.
395.
"A concept of counselling", Occupaticns, 1950,29,182-189.
Counselling Ado!escenls. New Y<^, McGraw-ffiU, 1950.
Williamson, E.G.: "Value orientation in counselling". Personnel and Guidance
Journal, 195i, 36,520-528.
: Vocational Counselling. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1965.
Vniliamson, EG. and ES. Bordin: 'Evaluating couitselling by means of a contn^ed
grotq) experiment". School and Society, 1940,52,434-440.Williamson, EG. and J.G. Darley: Student Personnel Work. New York, McGraw-
Hill. 1937.
Wolberg, L.R.: The Technique ofPsychotherapy. New York, Gnme and Stratlcm,
1954.
Wdlfc, H.: Women in the World of Work. University ofthe State ofNew York, 1969,
Doctoral Kssertation.
Wolpe, J.: Psychotherapy by Reciprocal Inhibition. Stanford, Stanford UniveniQr
Press, 1958.
Wolpe. J.. A. Salter and L.J. Revna (Eds): The CondUioning Therapies. New York,
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1964.WnM A3 • "TVansference in client centred therapy and in psychoanalysis". JournalZTonsuIting Psychology. 1951, 15,72-75.
Woods: "Letter to editor". Rehabiiitatlons Counselling Bulletin, 1964, 8,18-20.«/ nn C G ■ "The ethics of counselling". Educational and PsychologicalElement. 1952,12,161-177.. "Psychology, religion, and values for the counsellor". Personnel and
TT^e Journal. 1958.36. 331-3H. "pi^osophical and psychological bases ofpersonnel services in education",
r~^^i{auy (Ed), Personnel Services in Education, 58th Year Book-Pm H, HieSodeVTor die Study of Education, Chicago, HUnois, University of Chicago
^^^^Counsellor in a Changing World. WasWngton, American Personnel"TfiSdanceAssocaadon, 1962.
• "What has happened to vocational counselling?" The School Counsellor.
1963,10' _ l-couriselling psychologists—Who axe they?" Je«rnal ofCounsettlne
196M0.211-221- 'Psycnoto^ j^rdflffeWTAeofyo/fle/iaviow.NewYork,McGraw-Hill, 1965.
iRnS®'' , •irvvelopmental tasks: Implications for the goals of guidance"Zaccana. Journal, 1965,44. 372-375.
Personnel y^^ond Behaviour. New York, Holt Rinehart, 1968.
Zytowski, l'-"-
.'i';' v,>"


--- PAGE 326 ---
't
,1'
Appendlcei
Professional and Ethical Standards*
Adopted by the National Vocational smd
Educational Guidance Association (NVEGA)
for all Its Members**
PREAMBLE
The National Vocational and Educational Guidance Association Is an educational sdentiflc
and profession^ organlz^on In India defeated to the service of society. Its coitimltmentto service Is based on the deep-rooted and Implicit faith In the worth dlenltv and
The areas of professional activity Identified hem o.
of NVEGA. For each of these areas certain gene^o^^JKf memb^pages as guidelines for ethical pradlce. These are orefaf^Includes certain principles relevant and common to th tf section whlAorganization. " ^^® of aH members of the
♦The Ethical and Piofesaonal Standards adonterf h
those laid down by the APGA and other simil been drawn on the lines ofWashington, D.C., is gratefully acknowledged ^ '"Sanizadons. Permission of APGA.♦•Adopted at the Annual Convention of the Naiicn,! v •
Association (NVEGA) held at the Osmania iTn- • °^bonal and Educational Guidance
1980. umveisity, Hyderabad, during March 27-29.Arsenian. S.: "American Personnel Guidance ^
Guidance Journal, 1961. 40. 206-209. oauon, Code of Efliics". Personnel and


--- PAGE 327 ---
Appendices 307
Ethical Standards:
Natlona! Vocadona! and Educationai Guidance
Association (NVEGA)
SECTION A
GENERAL
1. The member sincerely and deliberately strives to foster the development and
Improvement of tiie prof^lon.
2. The member has an obligation to Improve himself continuously by gaining
knowledge and acquiring skills to grow professionally throughout his career.
3. The member has a responsibility to the Institution which he serves. Therefore,
his professional acuities have to be In accord with the objectives of me
Institution.
4. The member must expect ethical behaviour among his professional associates
in NVEGA at all times. He Is under obligation to draw attention to any lapses
of members, and to attempt to rectl^ such conditions.
5. The member Is obliged to acquaint himself with the personnel functions of
non-members whose work Is expected to be competent and conform to.the
ethical standards. Where his Information raises serious doubt as to the ethical
behaviour of such persons. It Is his responsibility to attempt to recH^ sudi
conditions.
6. The member must not seek self-enhancement through expressing evaluation
or comparisons damaging to other professional workers.
7. The member should not claim professional qualifications exceeding those
possessed and Is responsible for correcting any misrepresentations oif hisqualifications by others.
8 The member providing services for personal remuneration shall. In. charging
fees for such services, take careful account of the charges made for comparable
services ty other professional persons.
9 The member who provides Information to the public or to his subordinates,
peers, or superiors has a dear responslblUly-to see that both the content andttw rnanner of presentation are accurate and appropriate.
10 The member has an obligation to ensure that evaluative Infonnatlon about■ persons, such as dlents. students, and applicants shall be shared only vrith
^ose persons who will use such Information for sWctly professional purposesand that their confidentiality Is not Impinged.. 1 The member shall offer professional services only ttuough the context of a
orofesslonal relationship. Thus testing, counselling and other services are not
to be provided through the mall 1^ means of newspaper, magazine artldes.public performances or through any other media.


--- PAGE 328 ---
308 CounsdJIng and Guidance
SECHON B
COUNSELLING
This section refers to practices InvoMitg a counselling relationship wldi a counsellee
or client and Is not Interxled to be applicable to practices Involving administrative
relationships with the persons being helped.
A counselling relationship denotes that the person seeking help retains full freedom
of choice ar)d dedslw and that the helping poson has tio authorl^ or responsibility
to ^prove or disapprove of the choices or decisions of the counsellee or client.
"Counsellee" or "client" Is used here to Indicate the person for whom ttie member has
assumed a professional responsibility. The counsellee or client Is the Individual with
whom the member has direct and primary contact.
1. The member's primary obligation Is to respect die Integrity and promote die
wellare of the client with vdwm he Is worMng.
Z. The counselling reladonshlp and Informadon resulting therefrom must be kept
conBdentlal, consistent wldi the obligations of die member as a professlorial
person.
3. CounselUiig materials, such as records of counselling lncludlr\g Interview notes,
test data, correspondence, tape recordings, and odier documents are to be
considered profeulonal Information for use In counselling. Research and teaching
of counsellors empl^ng the above materials shall be always with foil protection
of the Idend^ of the client and ^th precaution so that no harm is done or
arises to adversely afliect the client.
4. The client should have complete and full knowledge of the conditions under
vAlch he mey receive counselling assistance at or before the time he enters
die counselling relationship.
5. The member reserves the right to consult ar^ other professionally competent
petson(s) about his client. In choodng his professional consultants} the member
must avoid pladt^g the consultant(s) In any embarrassing situadon.
6. The member shall terminate a counselling relationship when he cannot be of
professional assistance to the client because of lack of competence or personal
liinltadon. In such instances the member shall refer his counsellee or client to
an appr^rlate specialist. In the event die client declines the suggested referral,
die member Is not obligated to continue die counselling relationship.
7. When die member leams from the counselling relationship of conditions which
are Ukely to harm others over whom his institution or agency has responsibility,
he Is expected to.report die condition to die appropriate responsible authority,
but In such a manner as not to reveal the Identity of his counsellee.
8. In the event that the counsellee's condition is such as to require others to
assume responslbllify for him, or when diere Is clear and Imminent danger to
die counsellee or to odiers, die member Is expected to report the fact to an
appropriate responsible authority, and/or take such other emergent measures
as the situadon demands.
9. Should the member be engaged In a work-setting which calls for any vartadon
from the above statements, die member Is obliged to ascertain that such
variations are Justifiable under the conditions and that such vailadons are
clearly specified Jind made known to all concerned with such counselling
service.


--- PAGE 329 ---
Appendices 309
SECTION C
lESnNG
1. The prlmaiy purpose of p^chologlcal testing Is to provide objective and
comparative measures for use In self-evaluation of the client or member's
evaluation of general or spedHc attributes of his dlerrt.
2. Normally, test results constitute only one of a varied of pertinent data for
guldaiKe and a>unselllng dedslc^ It Is the'member's responsibility to provide
adequate orientation or Infonnatlon to die testee(s} so that dte results of
testing may be understood In proper perspective with other relevant factors.
3. In nraking any statements to die public about tests care must be taken to ^e
accurate Infbrmadon and to avoid misconceptions or ary false d^ms.
4. Different tests demand dlffarent levels of competence for admlrdsdadon, s«»lng
and Interpretation. It Is. therefore, the respondblllty of the memtier to recognize
die limits of his competence and to perform on^ those functions which fall
within ills training and competence.
5. In selecting tests for use In a given situation or with a particular dient the
member must consider not only general but also spedflc validity, rellablliy
and appropriateness of the testfs).
6. Tests ^uld be admlrrlstered under the same conditions whldr wrere established
In dreir standardlzadon.
7. Except for research purposes explldtly stated, aiy departure from these ^dlled
condldons, as well as unusual behaviour or Irregularities during die testing
session which may afreet the Interpretation of the test results, must be recorded
ruid reported.
8. Since the value of psychological tests depends on the conditions of novelty.
In test administration, any prior dps. coaching, rehearsal of test taking or
reproduction of test Items shall be scrupulously avoided.
9. Preserving test securiy Is an Important professional obllgadon of the mernbers.
10. The member shall keep die examlnee(s) Informed about the purpose of tesdng.
His (client's) explldt prior understanding should determine who die redplents.
If ary. of the test results nvy be.
11. The member should guard against the approprladon, reproducHon. or
modiflcadons of published tests or parts diereof without express permission
. and adequate recognldon of the original author and/or publisher.
SECTION D
research AND PUBUCATION
1/ In research on human subjects, the member must avoid causing ary Injudous
effects or after effiects of the experiment upon his subjects.
2. The member may withhold Informadon or provide pseudo-lnfoimadon to
subjeds only when It Is essential to the Invesdgadon 2ind where he assumes
responsibility for corrective acdon following the Invesdgadon.


--- PAGE 330 ---
310 Cbunse/Z/rtgandCurdlance
3. In reporting research results, explicit mention must be made of all variables
and conditions known to the Investigator which might alfect Interpretation of
the data.
4. The member Is responsible for conductlrtg .and reporting his Investigations
with due sdentlRc rigour. He shall take all caution to minimize the posslblll^
of his findings being misleading.
5. The member has an obligation to make available original research data to
qualified researchers who may wish to replicate or verl^ the stuc^.
6. In reporting research results or In mak!r\g original data available, due care must
be taken to disguise the Identic of the subjects.
7. In conducting and reporting research, the member should be fomlllar with, and
give due reoignltlon to. previous work on the topic.
8. The member has die obligation to give due credit to those who have contributed
significantly to his research. In accordant with their contributions.
9. The member has ttre obligation to honour commitments made to subjects of
research In return for dreir cooperation.
10. The member Is expected to communicate to other members the results of any
research he judges to be of professional or sdentlflc-value.
SECTION E
CONSULTING AND PRIVATC PRACTICE
Consulting refers to a voluntaiy reladonshlp between a professlor^ helper and help-
needing Instltudon (Industry, business, school, college, etc.) In which the consultant
Is attempting to give help to the client In the solution of some current or potential
problem.
1. The member acting as a consultant must have a high degree of self-awareness
of his own values and needs In entering a helping relationship which involves
charge In a social Institution.
2. There should be understanding and agreement between corrsultant and client
as to the direction and goals of the attempted change.
3. The consultant must be reasonably certain that he or his organization has die
necessary skills and resources for giving die kind of help which Is needed.
4. The consulting relationship must be one In which client adaptablll^ and growth
toward self-direction are encouraged and cultivated. The consultant must
consistently maintain his role as a consultant and not become a decision
maker for die client.
5. The consultant. In announcing his avallablll^ for service as a consultant, follows
prof^lonal ladier than commercial standards In describing his services with
accuracy, dignity and caution.


--- PAGE 331 ---
Appendices 311
SECTION F
PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
1. The member Is responsible for establishing working agreements with supertvlsors
and with subordinates especially regarding counselling relationships,
confidentiality, distinction between public and private material, and a mutiia]
respect for the positions of parties Involved In such Issues.
Such working agreements may vary from one Insltutlonal setHng to another.
What should be die case In each Instance, however. Is that agreements should
have been specified, made known to those concerned, and whenever possible,
the agreements should reflect Institutional policy rather than personal Judgement.
2. The member's responsibility to his superiors requires that he keeps them
Informed of the conditions aflectlrrg the Institution, particularly those which
may be potentially disrupting or damaglrrg to the Institution.
3. The memt»r fias the responslblll^ to select competent persons for assigned
responsibilities and to see that his personnel are used maximally In the skills
and experlene tfiey possess.
4. The member has the responsibility of constantly stimulating his staff for their
and his own continued growth and Improvement. He must see that staff
members are adequately supervised as to the quality of their functioning and
for purposes of profosslonal development.
SECTION G
PREPARATION FOR PROFESSIONAL WORK
1. The member In charge of the training provides a sound programme of academic
study and supervised practice In order to prepare die trainees for their future
responsibilities.
2. The training programme should aim to develop In the trainee not only skills
and knowledge but also self-understanding.
3. The member should be on die watch for any manlf^tadons of personal
llndtatlons In a student-trainee ytMch may Influence the letter's ablll^ to senre
competent^ and has an obllgadon to offer assistance to the trainee In secudng
prof^lonal remedial help.
4. The training prograrnme should Include preparadon In research and sdmuladon
for the future prof^lonal wodcer to pursue research and add to the body of
knowledge in his Held.
5. The training programme should make the trainee aware of the ethical
re^nslbllldes and standards of the profession he Is entering.
6. The programme of preparation should aim at Inculcating among the trainees
die ideal of service to individuals and sode^ above personal gain.


--- PAGE 332 ---
Acceptance 118,129,130,168
Aclttnnan, N. 228
Acting out 56
Acturial theory 215
Actualizing potentialities 65
Adequate personality 28
Adjustment
problems 2
personal 129
Adler.A. 36,75
Adolescent rebellion 48
Adolescence 44,58
environmental crisis 59
internal crisis 59
identity formation 52
problems of adjustmoit 59,60
negativism 53
self attitudes 54
Adolescence theories
Anna Freud 45
Erlckson 47
Freud 44
Hall 44,45
Hartmaim 45
Rousseau 44
Sullivan 45
AdolfMyer 11,114
Adult dependence 56
Advising 53,114
AHectioii 17
Alcoholism 91
Alienation 49,50,58
Allen, C. 25
Allport,O.W. 16,36
Allport Vemon Lindzeystudyofvalues 139
An^guity 115
American Personnel Guidance Association
(APGA) 13
American Psydiological Associadon
(APA) 14
Anectodal record 100,109,144-146
Angel, E. 171
Angyal, A. 77,93
^mis, A.P. 145
Anxiety 72,74.81,90,112,274.279
latent 111
neurotic 97
normal 97
Anxie^ reactions 72
Anxiety and guilt 97
Ari)uckIe,D.S. 209
Afistotle 8
AtlhyAlphaandAnnyBeta Tests 12
Asdi, S. 178
Assertive training 90
Assxiational groups 278
ACtentiveness 121
Attitudes 130
testee-tester 136,137
Attitude change 118
Authoritarian approach 70
Authentic being 95
Authoritarian point ofview 70-73,162
Autobiography 144,145
defects in 145
structured 145
unstructured 145
qualitative analysis 145
Autonomy versus shame and guilt 51
Average acceptable enviroiunent 46
Baricprinciplesofleaming 87
Baldwin, A.L. 145
Bandura, A. 128
Barclay, JJl. 146
Beck,LR 209
Beers, C.W. 10,11
Behavioural counselling 91
BeiIin,H. 216
Behavioural modification 67,91,92
tenets of 91
Behaviouristic approach 87,102,105
Behaviouristic model 16
Behaviouristic therapy 87,88


--- PAGE 333 ---
btdex 313
Being and non-being 94,96
Being and becoming 94-97
Beliefs 118,130
Benedict, R. 10
Bennett, M.E. 181
Beidie.R.F. 23,98
Berenson, B.G. 100.103
Bhatia, C^. 286
Biersteidt, R. 278
Binet. A. 8,201
Binet-Simon tests 11,202
Bingham, W.V. 8
Binswanger, L. 96,97
BipolariQ' 71
Bird.D. 129
Bisexual!^ 71
Bixler.R.H. 254,258
Blau.P.H. 216
Blocher.D.H. 22,23,66,107
Bios, P. 25
Boas, S. 10
Bolton 188
Bonney.W.C. 183
Bordin,E.S. 14,32,33.115.150.152,
153,171,216,258
Borow, H. 274
Boydon, 11
Braid,!. 25
Brammer, L.M. 102,103,109,110.139,
149,150,152,168
Brayficld, A.H. 14
Breuer, J. 25
Bronfenbrenner, U. 158
Brovennan 237
Buchheimer, A. 120
Bugental, F.F.T. 173
Byin.K.D. 143,144
Byrne, R.H. 16.65,142,154
Callis, R.A. 149,154
Calvinistic doctrine 4
Campbell, D.P. 259
Cannon, W. 189
Career development 217-224
Carkhoff, R.R. 103
Career guidance 276
Career maturiQ' 218
Cartwright. R.D. 132,256
Case history 110,148
Case study 148
Catharsis 71,123,133
Cauell, J. McKeeii 8,19
Cause-effect determinism 4
Checklist 137
Chestnut, WJ. 129
Choice anxie^ 153
Choice making 57
Choice of career 214
Chotia,F.S. 286
Client-centered q>proach 75-80,82-83,
99,154
Client-centered therapy 75,76,78, 82
Clinical psychology 39
Closed group 185
Cognition 17
Cohen, B. 183
Coleman, J.C. 39,40
Coles. G. 256
Combs, A.W. 28,64.77
Communication 120
non-verbal 158.139,165
Composite theory 218
Conrad, D.C. 132
Conation 17
Concept of
bipolarity 71
bbexuality 71
displacement 71
sublimation '71
Conception of man 97
Conception of self 50
Conditions for personally change 83,84
ConGdentialiy 185
Conflict, Inter-generational 50
Consultancy 270
Continuous group 186
Control of extraneous variance 258
Conversational shifts 157
Conveying of experience 165
Copemican revolution 15
Correlational analysis 128
Counsellee-counsellor relationship 114,
160,161.164
Counsellee factors 132
Counselling
concerns 204
content 116,160
definition 22
emerg^ence 2-5
etqtectations 61-63
parcntAexpectations 62
teacher expectations 62


--- PAGE 334 ---
314 Index
goals 63-67
as a helping relationship 40
models 277-279
objectives 21,262
optimal conditions 166,167
asapaitofeducationalprogramme 208
variables affecting 127
philosophical concerns IS
insight therapies 69
siqtportive therqnes 69
as aiTofessIon 260-263
aixi related Gelds 24,33-39
trends in 272-275
values in 280
Counselling effectiveness in educational
setting 258-259
with college students 258,259
with elementary school students 258
with secondary school students 258
Coimselling and home adjustment 212
cotmselling model 122,277
movement in India 285-287
process 82-87,107.109-113.116.
121-124
steps in 122-124
and psychotherapy 25-31,273,274,
282
relationship 114-116,118-121,126
cognitive 115
commencement 126
commoimess-uniqueness 114
conative 115
control of relationships 126
termination of 112,113,127
variables affecting 117
research assumptions 255.256
Counselling in special areas 225-248
delinquents 232
drug Edicts 245-247
family 227,228
marital 233-235
non-communicative clients 232
parental 229-231,248
premarital 235,236
reluctant clients 232
weaker sections 241-245
women 236-241.248
Counsellor
academic preparation of 261,262
behaviouristtcally oriented 275
ethical standards of 264-267
humanistically oriented 275
legal considerations 267
practical skills 262.263
Counsellor
preparation 269
prerequisites of 269-271
role of 275
selection and training of 267,268
Counsellor variables 127-129
age 128
experience 129
personah'9 129
sex 129
Counter-conditioning 90
Counter-transference 169,170
Counter-will 110
Continuity of experience 47
Cramer, S.H. 214
Criles, D.O. 215
Cultural invention 48
Cumulative records 99,144.146,147
Cure 255
Cybernetics 92
Darley.J.C. 75,153,215
Darwinism 7
Dating 234-235
Davis, D.A. 98.130.214
Davis, J£. 11,13
Decision making 66,281
Defense mechanism 72
Degree of lead 163,164
Demos, O.D. 129
Dependency 56,153
Depth psychology 19
Dq)th therapy 279
Determinism versus Gee-will 4,5
Developmental crisis 55,56
Developmental tasks 43
Developmental Vocational theory 215-219
Dewey.J, 11
Diagnosis 100,134,149,151
Diagnostic classiGcation 153,154
Diaries 144
DictionaiyofOccupationalTitles(DOT) 12,
215
Diadactic technique 101
DiflereiUiaiionveTSUsnon-diGiBrentiation 55,
56
Dimensions of test inteipretation 141
IKrective approach 70,99,100,161,162


--- PAGE 335 ---
bidex 315
Displacement 71
Distinction between counselling and
psychotherapy 29-32
Distrust 113
Diversion technique 175
Dix.D. 24
DoUard,!. 88,89.145
Drt^fus, E.A. 130
Dymond,R.F. 131,255,256
EbeI.R.L. 140
Eclectic aiqvoach 101-105
Eclectic stance 103
Edgar 255
Educational and career counselling 98
Educational counselling 121,201-213
as an activi^r 203
as a discipline 203
as a function 203,204
as a philosophy 203,204
evaluation of 213
Educational guidance, aims of 206
Edwards personal preference scale
(EPFS) 128
Ego 70
Ego apparatus 45 '
Ego elements 46
Ego qualities SO, 55
Ego integration 29
Ego ^thesis 47
EIGENWELT 94
Ekman, P. 158
EU Weaver 11,98
EUenberger 171
EUis 107,124
Empathy 84,85,116,120,131
dimensions of empathy 120
Encyclage 281
English, A.C. 102
English AJB. 102
Epigenetic principle 46,50
Erickson, E.H. 36.45,46,50-55,107
Eios and Thanatos 71
Esdaile 25
Establishing counselling relationship 161
Ethical standards 306-311-
Evaluation of approaches 25
Evaluation approaches 252,253
case stu(^ 253
experimental 253
surv^ 252
Evaluation ofcounselling 249-258
criteria for 256,257
internal versus external 257
objective versus subjective 257
problems of evaluation 250-252
Evaluation ofpsychological tests 142
Existential anxie^ 85
Existential counselling 96,115
Existential encounter 115
Existentialism 96
Existential therapist 95
Existential view 17,95,105,216
Expectations of counselling 62,63
counselles 62
parental 62
teachers 62
Experience 131
experimental approach 253
extinction 90,91
eysenck, HJ. 254,255
factors affecting results of p^chologi-
cal tests 137
factored tests 137
Family counselling 228,229
Family group consultation 225-227
Family relationship 229
Fantasy 222
Fatalistic determinism 4
Feelings 164,165,168
Feelings of alienation 58
Fiedler, F.E. 129^130,131
First interview 112
Fisks,D.W. 256
Flanagan, J.C. 215
FlexibiliQ' 120
Follow-up counselling 127
Forces creating problems of adjustment 2
Ford,D.H. 105
Form, W.H. 216
Frank, D. 256
Frank], V.E. 96
Free association 89,157
Freedom 16.17.202.284
Free floating anxiety 90
Frequency of counselling sessions 184
Freud, S. 16,19,42.50.70,71,73,74.75,
110.171.252,273
Froclich.C.P. 146.150
Fromm, E. 9,36
Fuller. E.F. 129


--- PAGE 336 ---
316 Index
Fundamental premise of guidance 188
Functions of school counsellors 210-211
Functional elements 24
Functional guilt 95
Fully functioning person 28,42,55, 81,
82,85
Gales, H.D. 111
Galton, F. 8
Gaifield. SI. 105
Garrett, A. 156,157
GalIat.H£. 216
Geller.M.H. 129
Generation gap 49
Gendlm,E.T. 119
Generativity versus stagnation 54
Genuineness 129
Gerler.w. 132
Gestures 158,159,160,165
Ginzberg,E. 215-217,221.222
Ginzberg's theory 222
Glover, E. 255
Goals of cotinselling 61,63-67
Goldberg,?. 237
Goldman, L. 140,41
Goldstein, K. 64,77,93
Gomberg.RJ^. 152
Gonyea, G.G. 254
Gorkal, 287
Gribbons,W.D. 209.215
Group counselling 177-187
assumptions and limitadons 180
duration of sessions 184
frequent^ of sessions 184
mechnicsof 181
process of 184
structuring of 179
types of groups 181
vdueof 182,183
Groups
associational 278
closed 185
continuous 185
marathon 183
sensitivity 183
T-Groups 183
selection of members 184
size of 184
Group, participation 185
Guidanu 34,35,36,37,38
Guidance counsellee 35,37
Guidance bureaux 288,289
Gustad,J.W. 23,129,141
Hahn.M.E. 22
Halo effect 146
HallG.S. 11,44,77
Hamrin S 127
Harper.W.R. 11.71.98
Hartmann, H. 36,45,46
Handling resistance 174
direct confrontation technique 174
direct manipulation technique 174
minor adaptation technique 174
HartzeU.!.?. 129
Havighurst, AJ. 43,55
Headshrinker 27
Hcidigger, M. 95
HeUer.K, 132
Helping relationship 41
Herberg 98
Heir, EL. 214
Hershenson, D3. 216
Higher education objectives of 207
Haion,T.L. 216,219
Hilton's theory 218
Hippocrates 19
HoUand.I.L. 216,218,224
Holland's theory 218,222
HoUingshead, A3. 216
HoUis,F. 152
Hcppock,R. 13,215,218
Hoppock's theory 218
Homer, M.S. 237
Homey, 36
Hoirocks, J.E. 49
Hoyt.D.P. 146,150
Hull,C.L. 12
Humanistic ap^soach 16.75-78
Hununel 32
Humphry's, A. 211
Humanistic view 16
Humannacure, dimensions of 2-5
active-passive nature 4
good-evil 4
neutral 4
reactive-interactive 5
Hiunan treatment ofmentally ai 24
Humanness 129
Huxley, A. 15
Hygiology 39


--- PAGE 337 ---
Ind&< 317
Id 70
Identity 47
Identity crisis 52,58
Identity fonnaticn 52
Identity versus role diffusion 52
Inunediate goals of counselling 64
Individual and group counselling 185,186
differences 186
similarities 185
Lidustiy versus inferiority 51
Infallibility of tests 136
Initiative versus guilt 51
Insight 124
Insight therapies 68
Intake 112
Inter-generational conflicts 49
Integrative psychology 103
IntegriQ' versus despair 54
Eternal frame ofreference 79
Internal resistance 172
Inter-personal process recall IPR 124,159
Interpretation of test results 139-143
descriptive 142
evaltiative 142
genetic 142
predictive 142
Intervention 277—279
Interview 156-157
empirical validation of 162
inconsistencies and g{q)s in 157
planning of 143,144
pre-counselling interview 109
techniques of 162
Intimacy versus isolation 53
Introjection 79
frresponsibilily of students 60
Jahoda, G. 9
James, W.. 36
Jensen, B.T. 256
Johnson, B.C. 128,188
Jones, A.J. 114
Jourard, S,M. 107
Jung,C. 11,36
Kagan, N. 159
Kehas 209
Kees,W. 158
KeU,B.L. 65
KeUy,G.K. 150
Khorshed, A.W. 286
Kiertegaard, S.A. 97
King. P. 128.129
Kirtner,W.L. 256
Kitson, H. 13
Kline 132
Koile,EA. 129
Kranz.GA. 258
Knimboltz. JJ). 65,66
Lack of assurance 153
Lack of informadon 154
Language 167
Latent anxieQ' 111
LaoTze 93
Lawrence, M. 140
Learning theory 87
Leafgren 128,129
Lecky.P. 93
Learner, B. 132
Levinson, FX 152
Uvitt,E.E. 254
Lewis. E.C. 26,257,259,264.265
Limitadons of diagnosis 151
Limitadons of psychological tests 135
Limiting counselling relationship 125
Lindzey, O. 77 ,
Lohnes.P.R. 215
London, P. 124,215
Lortie 38
Maccoby, N. 159
Machianism 7
McLean, M.A. 22
Mahan.T.W. 31
Mahler. C A. 183
Maladjustment 78,82
Malan,D.H. 255
Malinoswki, B. 10
Marital counselling 233-235,247,248
Mathewson, R.H. 210
Marital problems 235
Maslow.AJl. 16,28.77,93,107,217,218
May.R. 65,97,171 "
Meaning 167
McCully.C.H. 38,41,42
McKinney.F. 160
Me^M. 9,10,48
Mediate goals of counselling 65
Medical model 134
Meehl,P.E. 150
Mehta,H.P. 286 • '


--- PAGE 338 ---
318
Mendelsohn. G.A. 129
Menninger, K. 189
Mental health 9,65
Mental t^fgiene 8
Mental meastiremait 7
MeirUlG. 11
Mesmer, P.A. 16,24
Mesmerism 24
MiUa-.N.E. 88,89.145,209
Mills, D.H. 129
Miner, JB. 11,12
Minkowski 95
Minnesota college student counselling
study 259
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality
hiventory(MMFI) 135
Minnesota point of view, 98.100,101
Misconception of counselling 23
Missouri ^agnostic classiHcation 154
MTTWELT 94
Moral issues of counselling 6
Modification of behaviour 67
Morris, V.C. 17
Mortensen, D.G. 15,147
Motivation 207
Mowrer,O.F. 127,145,255.274
Mueller, R.H. 65
Munsterberg, H. 8
Murray, H.A. 16
Multiple coimselling 184,185
Myers, R,A. 132
Nachmann,B. 216
National Classification of Occupations
NCO 215
National Vocational Guidance Associa
tion 12.13,127
Needs 78
Negative identity 52
Negative conditioning loop 92
Negativism 52
Nestor, B. 256
Nuclear conflicts 47
Neurotic anxie^ 90,95
Neurhypnology 25
Newcomb, T.K. 158
Newman, Cardinal 36
Normative crisis 47
Non-being 95
Non-communicative clients 233
Non-directive ^>pioadi 162,163
Index
Non-test qjpraisal technique 144
Non-verbal behaviour 158-160,164,165
Non-verbal communication 158
Non-verbal cues 159
Nonnative crisis 52
North, F.D. 211
Not-self 82
Occupational choice 217.222
Occupational environments 218
Odgers,J.G. 288
Oedipus Rex 4
OUara's theoiy 217
Omar Khayyam 4
Ontologicd guilt 95,96
Open group 185
Opwant conditioning 90
Outcome research 255,256
Parental counselling 229-232
Parental expectations of counselling 62Parent-teacher associations PTA 230
Parker. C.A. 128
Parloff.N£. 64,65
Parsons. F. 12,13,98.215
Pasricha, P. 286
13.14,98.149.215,257
22.31.32.64.102.149Paulson, B.P. 127
22.114,152,153,154Pepinsky.p, 22,114
Perceptual field 82
Perceptual sensitivity 130Peuy 32
Perez, J.F. 22
Peris. L.P. 153
Personal adjustment 129Personal counselling 253
Personal data sheet 12
^"-22'
Personality tests 137
Pcstalozzi 3
Phiilips, J.E. 92
Phenomenal field 78 70
Philosophic concern 15Pmel, p. 24
p^®P'"«Ple 70.72Pooimans psychotherapy 28


--- PAGE 339 ---
Index 319
Positive reconditioning 90
Positive mental health 65
Positive amplyfying loop 95
Positive rcgaid 80
Pray.K. 152
Precounselling interview 109
Premarital counseUing 235-237
Prescott, DA. 146
Principles of behaviour modlHcation 91
Primary mental tests 13
Privacy 117
Problem check list 59
Process of counselling 110
Process research 255
Projection 115
Projcctive tests 137
Psychoanalysis 70-73
criticism 74
diagnosis 149
relevance to counselling 73—75
Pqrchoanalytic therq>y 72.76,124Psychological case hluidling .103
objectives of case handling 104steps in case handling 104psychological determinism 70
Psychological tests 134-139
limitadons 135,136
types ^ 136
uses 135,139 ,
Pq-chological testing and diagnosis
Psychological theory 215-218PsychologicalviewofhumanrationaliQ' 105
Psychosocial development 50Psychosocial stages 50-54
Psychother^utic model 121
Psychotherapy 82,98Pi^l data questionnaire 147
RAOP 91
rSsS. 58159,60.207.2^.275Rapjxirt 116.117.119.120.131.156Rating scales 144.146Readiness 108
Reassurance 113
Reaves, C.C. ,
Reaction formation 73
Reality principle 70
Reconstiucdve appro®"
Recurrent reference 157
Re^clage 281
Reeducadve approach 69,70
Referral 111,112
Reflection of feeling 165,166
Regents commission 202
Reid.D.R. 165
Reinforcement theory 88,89
Reladonship technique 164,165
Repertoire of leads 121
Resistance 72,168,171,172,173-176
external 173
fimcdons 173
handling of 174
internal 172
sources of 172
Responsibili^ in counselling situadon 116
Review 158
Riddle. C.W, 58
Robinson, F.P. 14,25,154
Roe's theory 215-218
Roeber,E.C. 210
Rogers, C.R. 9,14,16,19.22,23.25,38,
64,65,70,75,76,77,78,81,82,
83,84.88,93,107,118,120.129,
130,131,139,150,151,15Z 164,
168.169,209,255
Role of counselling in guidance 38
Role differendadon 52
Rosenzweig, S. 255
Roszck 274
Roth,R 216
Rothney, J.W.M. 258
Rousseau 3,44
Ruesch, J. 158
Rush,B. 10.24
Samler, J. 130,215
Sanderson,-G. 274
SqiosI^^ A. 132
Sartre, J j. 97 •
Schmuller, A.H. 15.147
School curriculum and counselling 211
Schuldt.WJ'. 132
Schwartz 180 •'
Schwebel 264
Screening tests 133-135
Seeman, J.A. 141
Segel, SJ. 216
Segregatedversustotalpushcounselling 279
Selecdon ofcounsellors 268


--- PAGE 340 ---
320 Index
Self-acceptance 110
actualization 82,98,104-106
concept 50.77,78,80.81.82.105.237
conflict 153
defeating behaviour 204
denial 81
development 80
encounter 115
experience 80
flmctioning persons 82
fulfilment 28
management 81
other encounter 115
realization 28
regard 82,83
theory 77-79
worth 81,82
Scnsitivi^ groups 183
Sexually 44
Sharing of experience 165,166
Shartle, EJ. 220
Shertzer.B. 41,120.131,146,249
Shoben, EJ. 66
Shostrom, E.L. 109,110,139,149,150,153
Silence 164
Silverman, H.L. 255
Simon, J.M. 216
Skills, counsellor -120,131
Skinner, B.P. 4
Smith G.E. 16,22,210
Snyder.B.U. 129,165
Snygg.B. 28,64,77
Socio-cultural factors 56
Sociological theories 215,218
Sociometric technique 147
Sociometry 127
Soi^ocles 4
Sovereignty 18
Spranger, E. 118
Speculation 127
Stages in counselling process
Stagnation 58 .,
Standley, N.y. 216
Status of counselling in India
Steps in counselling process
Steffle 128,129,222
Steps in directive cqrproach (ASDPCF) 99
StereoQqre 166
Stoler, N. 132
Stone. S.C. 41,120,131,146,249
84,107
284-290
122-124
Strong vocational interest blank {SVIE) 13,128,142
Structuring in counselling 236
relationship 162
Strupp, H.H. 129,255
Student's role expectation 204
Study skills 208
SQ-leoflife 74.75
Sublimation 71
Sullivan, HJ. 45,77
Superego 70
Super, D.E. 14,55,152,215,216
Supportive theories 69
Swift, J. 15
Systematic dcsensitization 90
Systematic relaxation 90
Szasaz,T.S. 261
T. Groups 183
Tiedeman, D.V. 66,215,217
Tiedeman's theory 217
TilUch, P. 97
Timing 166
Thomdike, E.L 12 ,
Thome, F.C. 25,103,104,105.140.150
Thanatos 71
Third force 75
Thusrtone, L.L. 13
Tomer, A. 276
Tolbert 216
Tolerance 131
Tone 120
Total push counselling 279
Trait and factor ^rproach 98,99.101,134,
155.215
Transference 72,115,-168,169,170
therapeutic functions 169
Traxler, A.E 210
Trust versus mistrust 50
Tucker. I.F. 70
Tuke.W. 24
Tuma, A.H. 129,141
Tyler. L.E. 31,32,37,67,129,130,149,150
Types of psychological tests 136
Ultimate goals of counselling 64
Unconditioned acceptance 82,120,161,168
Uncoditioned positive regard 38
Unconscious 74
Understanding 119
lb'


--- PAGE 341 ---
K'W' 0
/j
J
.1
■r^
Index 321
United States Employment Services
USES U
URANGST 95
UMWELT 94
Urban. H£. 105
222
38.
Values 18,130,280.282
Value concepts 118
Value orientations 118
Vance, F.L. 32
Vocational Bureau of Boston 98
Vocational choice evaluation 253
Vocational counselling 121,214
exploration and contract setdng
process of 220
state of critical decision 221
Vocational counselling and guidance
223,224
Vocational development stages 222
Vocational development theories 215-218
composite theory 218
decision theory 215-218
development thcoiy 215
vocational developmenttheory 215
psychoanalytical ^eory 218
psychological basis 215
sociological basis 215
Vocational guidance 34-38,98.227
Vogel, J,S. 256
Volslq'.T.C. 32
Volimtary—involimtary participation in
group counselling 185
135
Wastage 58
Weaver, E. 11,98,214
Weiner, J,B. 150
Wcitz.R.D. 129.130
Wells, Fi. 12
Weschleradultmtelligencescale(WAIS)White, M.A. 107
Wicas, E.A. 131
Williamson, E.G. 12.75.98,99,130,139
149,150,151,152,153.215,258
Will to power 74
Winer, 150
Winning confidence 112
Witkin, A. 178
11
237
Witmer, L.
Wolfe. H.
Wilie 9
Wolpe, J. 66,89, 90, 140
Women-counselling 236-241
Wood,A.B. 183,169
Woodworth. R.S. 12
Worcester 11
Wrenn. C.G. 14,209.210,263
Wundt.W,B. 11
Yamamato, K. 14
Ycrkes, R. 12
Youth, its concerns 56,57
growing up 56
Zaccaria, J.S. 55
Zuwaylif 129
N '■i.t
^ ' 'T
'-IV. •'ViW1 ,1.
j-yi.

